EAST OF EDEisr


‘John Steinbeck’s novel follows the pattern of The .
Pastures of Heaven but is on the scale of The Grapes of
Vratli. It is indeed longer; but it is also finer. We are
lack in the Salinas Valley, with its exuberance of '
latural beauty and wild Life which he knows so well,
nd with its rich varieties of human kind; but not-far •
iway is Salinas town with its stores, saloons, and ,
vhorehouses; and further back again are King Town,
vVatsonville, State politics, universities, and the First'
vVorld War. It is the story of families rooted in the
soil but torn apart by differences of birth and taste, by
primitive love and hate, and by civilized desires fol^.
more wealth than can be made by farming and better'
education than can be got at the local school. The ‘
Hamiltons and the Trasks recur in all four parts of
the epic. Samuel Hamilton, the patriarchal Irishman;
with his wife Liza standTor the power of good at the
back of things . , .


‘ Man alone has the choice of good and evil. And
this is illustrated in the characters of Adam Trask’s
sons, Caleb and Aron, who are really Cain and Abel.
For their mother is a moral monster, cruel and mali- ■
cious . . . and Caleb has to struggle against that ele-
ment of her in his make-up . . .


‘ 'What stays in the mind is the sure outline in which
Steinbeck etches his character portraits and the moral
intensity of this epic of ordinary lives.’

- Time and Tide



EAST OF EDE:


‘John Steinbeck’s novel follows the pattern of The
Pastures of Heaven but is on the scale of The Grapes of
Wrath. It is indeed longer; but it is also finer. We are
back in the Salinas Valley, with its exuberance of
natural beauty and wild life which he knows so well,
and with its rich varieties of human kind; but not'far
aw'ay is Salinas town with its stores, saloons, and
w'horehouses ; and further back again are King Town,
Watsonville, State politics, universities, and the FirSt
World War. It is the story of families rooted in, the
soil but tom apart by differences of birth and taste, by
primitive love and hate, and by civilized desires fob;
more wealth than can be made by farming and bette£
education than can be got at the local school. The
Harml’tons and the Trasks reciu: in all four parts of
the epic. Samuel Hamilton, the patriarchal Irishman,
with his w^ife Liza standTor the power of good at the
back of things ...

‘Man alone has the choice of good and evil. And
this is illustrated in the characters of Adam Trash’s
sons, Caleb and Aron, who are really Cain and Abel,
For their mother is a moral monster, cruel and mail- .
cious . . . and Caleb has to struggle against that ele-
ment of her in his make-up ...

‘What stays in the mind is the sure outline in which
Steinbeck etches his , character pornaits and the mond
intensity of this epic nf ordinary ordTide^



Other PAN Books by John Steinbeck

. • SWEET THURSDAY
THE MOON IS DOWN
THE PEARL and BURNING BRIGHT
HE WINTER OF'OUR DISCONTENT


CONDITIONS OF SALE

This book shall not be lent, re-sold, hired out
or otherwise disposed of by way of trade in
any form of binding or cover other than that
in which it is published



EAST OF EDEN

JOHN STEINBECK



unabridged


PAN BOOKS LTD : LONDON




PASCAL COVICI


Bear Pat^

You came upon me carving some kind of little figure oui\
of wood and you said, ^Why don’t you make something for .
me?’ • • '

I asked you what you wanted, and you said, ‘A box’

‘What for?’

‘To put things in.’

‘What things?’

‘Whatever you have,’ you said.

Well, here’s your box. Nearly eveiything I have is in it,
and it is not full. Pain and excitement are in it, and feeling
good or bad and evil thoughts and good thoughts ~ the plea-
sure of design and some despair and the indescribable joy. of
creation.

And on top of these are all the gratitude and lave I have
for you. '

. And still the box is not full.


JOHN




-CONTENTS


Part One

7

Part Two

\

123

Part Three

261


Part Four


391




lEast of 'Eden




Part One


CHAPTER 1

I

The Salinas Vallejo is in Northern California. It is a long'i
narrow swale beuveen two ranges of mountains, and the Salinas'
River winds and twists up the centre until it falls at last- into
•Monterey Bay.

I remember my childhood names for grasses and secret flovi-ers.

I remember • where a tosd may live and what time the birds
awaken in the summer - and what trees and seasons smelled like

- how people looked and walked and smelled even. The memorj'
of odours is very rich.

I remember that the Gabilan Mountains to die east of the val-
■ley were light gay mountains full of sun and loveliness and a
kind of invitation, so that you wanted to climb into their warm
foothills almost as you want to climb into the lap of a beloved '
mother. They were beckoning mountains with .a brown grass
love. The Santa Lucias stood up against the sky to the west and
kept the valley from the open sea, and they were dark and brood-
ing - unfriendly and dangerous. I always found in myself a
dread of west and a love of east. Where I ever got such an idea I
cannot say, unless it could be that the morning came over the
peaks of the Gabilans and the night drifted back from the ridges
of the Santa Lucias. It may be that the birth and death of the
day had some part in my feeling about the uvo ranges of moun-
tains.

From both sides of the valley little streams slipped out of tlie
hill canyons and fell into the bed of the Salinas River. In the,
winter of wet years the streams ran full-freshet, and they swelled
the river until sometimes it raged and boiled, bank-full, and then"
it was a destroyer. The river tore the edges of the farm, lands and

- washed whole acres down; it toppled barns and houses into
itself, to go floating and bobbing away. It trapped cows and pigs
and sh^p and drowned them in its muddy brown water and

. carried them to the sea. Then when the late spring came, the^
river drew in from its edges and the sandbanks appeared. And in-

7 '



le summer the river didn’t run at aU hbove grotmd Some pools
ould be left in the deep swirl places under a lugh bank. The ■
L and grasses grew back, and vviUows straightened up mth
le flood debris in their upper, branches. The Sahnas was only a
art-time river. The summer sun drove it underground. It was
6t a fine river at all, but it was the only one we had, and so we
oasted about it- how dangerous it was in a wet winter and how
rv it was in a dry sximmer; You can boast about anything if.
c’s aU you have. Maybe the less you have, the more you are re-

luired to boast. . . , ■

The floor of the Salinas Valley, beuveen the ranges and below
•he foothills, is level because this valley used to be the bottom of
1 hundred-mile inlet from the sea. The river mouth at Moss
Landing was centuries ago the entrance to this long inland
water. Once, fifty miles down the valley, my father bored a well.
The drill came up first with topsoil and thm with gravel- and
then with wliite sea sand full of shells and even pieces of whale-
bone. There were twenty feet of sand and then black earth again, ,
and e\’en a piece of redwood, that imperishable wood that does
not rot. Before the inland sea the valley must have been a forest.
And those things load happened right under our feet. And it
seemed to me sometimes at night that I could feel both the sea
.and the redwood forest before it.

On the wide level acres of the valley the topsoil lay deep and
^rtile. It rcquued only a rich winter of rain to make it break


forth in grass and flowers. The spring flowers in a wet year were-
unbelicvablc. The whole valley floor, and the foothills too, would
be carpeted with lupins and poppies. Once a woman told me
that coloured flowers would seem more bright if you added a
few white flowers to give the colours dcBnition. Every petal of
blue lupin is edged with white, so that a field of lupins is more
blue than you can imagine. And mixed with these were splashes
of California poppies. These too are of a burning colour— not
orange, not gold, but if pure gold were liquid and could raise a
cream, that golden cream might be like the colour of the poppies.
When their season was over the yellow mustard came up and
greu’ to a great height. When my grandfather came into the -val-
ley the mustard was so tall that a man on horseback showed only
his head above tlie yellow flowers. On the uplands the grass
would be strewn with buttercups, with hen-and-chickens, with
black-centred yellow violets. And a little later in the season
there would be red and yellow stands of Indian paintbrush.
These were the flowers of the open spaces exposed to the sun.


8



Under the live oaks, shaded and dusky, the maidenhair flour-
ished and gave a good smell, and under the mossy banks of'the ■
watercourses whole clumps of five-fingered ferns and goldy-
backs himg down. Then there were harebells, tiny lanterns,
cream white and almost sinful-looking, and these were so rare
and magical that a child, finding one, felt singled out and special;
all day long. / ‘

When June came the grasses headed out and turned brown,
and the hills tmmed a brown which was not brown but a gold
and saffron and red - an indescribable colour. And from then on.
-imtil the next rains the earth dried and the streams stopped.
Cracks appeared on the level ground. The Salinas River sank
under its sand. The wind blew down the valley, picking up dust
and straws, and grew stronger and harsher as it went south. It
stopped in the evening. It was a rasping nervous wind, and the
dust particl^ cut into a man’s skin and burned his eyes. Men
working in the fields wore goggles and tied handkerchiefs
around their noses to keep the dirt out.

The valley land was deep and rich, but the foothills wore only
a skin of topsoil no deeper than the grass roots; and the farther
up the hills you went, the thinner grew the soil, with flints stick-
ing through, until at the brush line it was a kind of dry flinty
gravel that reflected the hot sun blindingly.

I have spoken of the rich years when the rainfall was plentiful.
But there were dry years too, and they put a terror on the valley.
The water came in a tliirty-year cycle. There would be five or
■ six wet and wonderful years vvh'en there might be nineteen to
twenty-five inches of rain, and the land would shout with grass.
Then would come six or seven pretty good years of twelve to
sixteen inches of rain. And then the dry years would come, and
sometimes there would be only seven or eight inches of rain.
The land dried up and the grasses headed out miserably a few
inches high and great bare scabby places appeared in the valley.
The. live oaks got a crusty look and the sagebrush was grey. The
land cracked and the. springs dried up and the cattle listlessly
nibbled dry twigs. Then the farmers and the ranchers would be
filled with disgust for the Salinas Valley. The cows would grow
thin and sometimes starve to death. People would have to haul
water in barrels to their farms just for drinking. Some families
would sell out for nearly nothing and move away. And it never
failed that during the dry 3^ears the people forgot about the rich
years, and during the wet years they lost all memory of the dry
years. It was always that way.


9



iid that was the long Salinas Valley. Its history was^like that of
le rest of the state. First there were Indians, an inferior Freed
-ithbut. energy, inventiveness, or culture, a people that lived on-
rubs and grasshoppers and shellfish, too lazy to hunt or fis -
"hey ate vvliat they could pick up and planted nothing. They
io'undcd bitter acorns for floiir. Even their warfare was a weary


jantomime. ,• . , < j

■'Then the hard, dry Spaniards came exploring through, greedy •
ind • realistic, and their greed was for gold or God. They .col-
ccted souls as they collected jewels. They gathered mountains ,
md valleys,, rivers and whole horizons, the way a man might
iiQvv gain title to building lots. These tough, dried-up men
moyed restlessly up the coast and down. Some of them stayed oii
grants as large as principalities, given to them by Spanish, kings
who had not the faintest idea of the gift. These first owners
lived in poor feudal settlements, and their cattle ranged freely
and multiplied. Periodically the owners killed the cattle for
their hides and tallow and left the meat to the vultures and
coyotes.-

When the Spaniards came they had to give everything they'
saw a name. This is the first duty of any explorer - a duty and a
^privilege. You must name a thing before you can note it on your
hand-drawn map. Of course they were religious people, and the
men who could read and write, who kept the records and drew
the maps, were the tough untiring priests who travelled with the
soldiers. Thus the first names of places were saints’ names or re-
ligious holidays celebrated at stopping places. There are many
saints, but they are not inexhaustible, so that we find repetitions
in the first namings. We have San Miguel, St Michael, Sah
Ardo, San Bernardo, San Benito, San Lorenzo, San Carlos, San
Francisquito. And then the holidays — Natividad, the Nativity;
Nacimiente, the Birth; Soledad, the Solitude. But places were
also named from the way the e-xpedition felt at the time: Buena
Esperanza, good hope; Buena Vista because the view was
beautiful, and Chualar because it was pretty. The descriptive
narhes followed: Paso de los Robles because of the oak trees;
Los- Laureles for the laurels; Tularcitos because of the reeds ■
in the swamp; and Salinas for the allaili which was white as
salt.-

. Thm places were named after animals and birds seen - Gabi-
he hawks which flew in those mountains; Topo for


10


the mole; Los Gatos for the wild cats. The suggestions some-,
times came from the nature of the place itself : Tassajara, a, cup
and saucer; Lagima Seca, a dry lake; Corral de'Tierra for a
fence of earth; Paraiso because it was like Heaven. ■ ■ ’

Then the Americans came — more greedy because there were
more of them. They took the lands, remade the laws to make
their titles good. And farmholds spread over the land, first in the
valleys and then up the foothill slopes, small wooden houses
roofed with redwood shakes, corrals of split poles. Wherever a
trickle of water came out of the ground a house sprang up and
a family began to grow and multiply. Cuttings of red geraniums
and rose bushes were planted in the. door-yards. Wheel tracks of
buckboards replaced the trails, and fields of com and barley and
wheat squared out of the yellow mustard. Every ten miles along
the travelled routes a general store and blacksmith shop hap-
pened, and these became the nuclei of little towns, Bradley, King
City, Greenfield.

The Americans had a greater tendency to name places after
people than had the Spaniards. After the valleys were settled the
names of places refer more to things which happened there, and
these to me are the most fascinating of all names because each
name suggests a story that has been forgotten. I think of BoIm
N euva, a new purse; Morocojo, a lame Moor (who was he and
how did he get there?); Wild Horse Canyon and Mustang Grade
and Shirt Tail Canyon.^ The names of places carry a charge of
the people who named them, reverent or^irrev^erent, descriptive,
either poetic or disparaging. You can name anything San Lor-
enzo, but Shirt Tail Canyon or the Lame Moor is, something
quite different. ,

The wind whistled over the settlements in the afternoon, and
the farmers began to set out mile-long wind-breaks of eucalyptus
to keep the ploughed topsoil from blowing away. And this is
about the way the Salinas Valley was when my grandfather
brought his wife and settled in the foothills to the east of King
City.


11



CHAPTER 2


must depend on hearsay, on old photogxapte, on stones told, .
ind'on memories which are hazy and mixed with fable in trymg
o tell you about the Hamiltons. They were not eminent people,
md tliefe are few records concerning them except for the usual
papers on birth, marriage, land ownership, and death.

'Yptmg Samuel Hamilton came from the north of Ireland and
so did his wife. He was the son of small farmers, neither rich nor
poor, who had lived on one landhold and in one stone house for.
many hundreds of years. The Hamiltons managed to be remark-
ably well educated and well read; and, as is so often true in that
green country, they were connected and related to very great,
proplc and very smaU pieople, so that one cousin might be a
baronet and another cousin a beggar. And of course they were
descended from the ancient kings of Ireland, as every Irishman is; •
"Why Samuel left the stone house and the green acres of his
ancestors I do not know. He was never a political man, so it, is
not likely a charge of rebellion drove him out, and he was scrupu-
',lously honest, which eliminates the police as prime movers. •
There was a whisper - not even a rumour but rather an unsaid
feeling - in my family that it was love drpve him out, ahd not
love of the wife he married. But whether it was too successful .
love or whether he left in pique at unsuccessful love, I do not
know. We always preferred to think it was the former. Saimuel
had good looks and charm and gaiety. It is hard to imagine that
any country Irish girl refused him.

He came to the Salinas Valley full-blown and hearty, full of
inventions and energy. His eyes were very blue, and when Ke-
was tired one of them wandered outwards a little. He was a big
_ man but delicate in a way. In the dusty business of ranching he
seemed always immaculate. His hands were clever. He was a.
good blacksmith and carpenter and woodcarver, and he could
improvise anything with bits of wood and metal. He was for
ever inventing a new way of doing an old thing and doing it bet-
ter and quicker, but he never in his whole life had any talent for
making money. Other men who had the talent took Samuel’s
tricks and sold them and grew rich, but Samuel barely made
■ wages aU his life.

I don’t know what directed his steps towards the Salinas Val-

12



ley. It was an unlikely place for a man hom a jij,, ,

come to, but he came about thirty ycuvn lia

centurj' and he brought with him his tiny Irifih wile'

little woman humourless as a chicken. She Iiatl a (iuui p, ,

terian mind and a code of morals that pinned down and Inm p,

bfains out of nearly evernhing that was pleammi to do.

I do not know where Samuel met her, how he woocil l,,,,
married. I think there must have been some otlicr girl pHnutd'
somewhere in his heart, for he was a man of love and his wdfe
was not a woman to show her feelmgs. .^nd in spite of this, in
all-the years from his youth to his death m the Salinas Valley,
there was no hint that Samuel ever went to any other woman.

When Samuel and Liza came to the Salmas Vallei- all the
level land was taken, the rich bottoms, the little fertile creases in
the hills, the forests, but there was still margmm land to be
homesteaded, and in the barren hills, to the east o; v. hat Si nov.-
King City, Samuel Hamilton homesteaded.

He followed the usual practice. He took a qu.yter-s'Xt;on for
himself and a quarter-section for his wife, and since the va--
pregnant he took a quarter-section -for the child. Over tlie yearn
nine children were bora, four boys and five girls, and ear.-,
birth another quart«-section was added to the ranc.n. ana
makes eleven quaner-sections, or seventeen hundred ar.i


acres.

If the land had been any good the Hamilton.' ivrjid have
been rich people. But the acres were harsh and dry. There v.-er;
no springs, and the crust of topsoil v.as so thm that the fii.nty
bones stuck through. Even the sagebrush struggled to eon.'.t, and
the oaks were dwarfed from lack of moisture. Even in rea-tonae/.
good years there was so little feed that the cattle ken: t.hin run-
ning about looking for enough to eat. From their barren hill: th.-:
Hamiltons could look dotvn to the west and see the richnr-- o:
, the bottom land and the greenness around the Salinas. PJver.
Samuel built his house with his own hand.', and be hnih i
barn and a blacksmith shop. He found quite soon that even if b*
had ten thousand acres of hill country he could not make a Ir/-
ing on the, bony soil without water. His clcv'cr bands csiifi t
well-boring rig, and he bored wells on the lands of luckier .m'm
He invented and built a threshing machine and moved tl-r-vuc.-
the bottom farms in harvest time, threshing the grain hi: cv;
farm would not raise. And in his shop he sharpened pkvr--
and mended harrows and wdded broken axl-; and horr;:
Men from all over the district brought him tool: to mend a.v

■ - - IS



to improve. Besides, they loved to hear Samuel talk of the world
and its- thinking, of the poetry and philosophy that were going ■
on outside the Salinas Valley. He had a rich deep voice, good
both in song and in speech, and while he had no brogue there
was a rise and a lilt and a cadence to his talk that made it sound '
sweet in the ears of the taciturn farmers from the valley bottom.
They brought whisky too, and out of sight of the kitchen win-
dow and the disapproving eye of Mrs Hamilton they took hot
nips from the bottle and nibbled cuds of green wild anise to ’
coyer the whisky breath. It was a bad day when three or four
, men were not standing around the forge, listening to Samuel's
hammer and his talk. They called him a comical genius and car-
ried his stories carefully home, and they wondered at how the
stories spiUed out on the way, for they never sounded the same
repeated in their own kitchens.

Samuel should have been rich from his well rig and his thresh-
ing machine and his shop, but he had no gift for business.^ His
customers, always pressed for money, promised pa3rment after
harvest, and then after Christmas, and then after - until at last
they forgot it. Samuel had no gift for reminding them. And so
the Hamiltons stayed poor.

The children came along as regularly as the years. The few
overworked doctors of the county did not often get to the
ranches for a birth unless the joy turned nightmare and went on ,
for several days, Samuel Hamilton delivered all his own child-
ren and tied the cords neatly, spanked the bottoms and cleaned
up the mess. -When his youngest was born with some small ob-
struction and began to turn black, Samuel put his mouth against
the baby’s mouth and blew air in and sucked it out until the
..;. baby could take over for himself. Samuel’s hands were so good
and gentle that neighbours from twenty miles away would call
. on him to help with a birth. And he was equally good \rith
, mare, cow, or woman. . ,

■ ■ ' ^ great black book on an available shelf and it had

gold letters on the cover -Dr Gunn's Family Medicine. Some
pages were bent and beat up from use, and others were never
opened to the light. To look through Dr Gunn is to know the .
Hamiltons niedical history. These are the used sections - broken
^n^^ cuts, bruises, mumps, measles, back-ache, scarlet fever,
diphtheria, rhei^atism, female complaints, hernia, arid of
cour^ cve^hing to do with pregnancy and the birth of child- .
ren. The Hamiltons must have been either lucky or moral, for
the sections on gonorrhea and syphilis were never opened.

14



Samuel had no equal for soothing hysteria and bringing quiet
to a frightened child. It was the sweetness of his tongue and the
tenderness of his soul, ^^d just as there was a cleanness about
his body, so there was a’ cleanness in his thinking. Men coming
to his blacksmith shop to tallc and listen dropped their ciursing-
for a while, not from any kind of restraint but automatically, as
though this were not the place for it.

Samuel kept always a foreigimess. Perhaps it was in the ca-
dence of his speech, and this had the effect of making men, and
women too, tell him things thejr would not teU to relatives or
close friends. His slight strangeness set him apart and made him
safe as a repository. .

Liza Hamilton was a very different kettle of fish. Her head
was small and round and it held small round convictions. She
had a button nose and a hard little set-back chin, a grippLog jaw
set on its course even though the angels of God argued against.it.

Liza was a good plain cook, and her house -it was always her
house -was brushed and pummelled and washed. Bearing her
children did not- hold her back very much— tv/o weeks at the
most she had to be careful. She must have had a pelvic arch of
whalebone, for she had big children one after the other.

Liza had a finely developed sense of sin. Idleness was a sin,
and card playing, which was a kind of idleness to her. She was
suspicious of fun, whether it involved dancing or singing or
even laughter. She felt that people having a good time were wide
open to the devil. And this was a shame, for Samuel was a
laughing man, but I guess Samuel was wide open to the devil.
His wife protected him whenever she could.

She wore her hair always pulled tight back and bunned behind
in a hard knot. And since I can’t remember how she dressed, it
must have been that she wore clothes that matched herself ex-'
actly. She had no spark of humour and only occasionally a blade
of cutting wit. She frightened her grandchildren because she had '
no weakness. She suffered bravely and tmcomplainingly through
life, convinced that that was the way her God wanted everyone
to live. She felt that rew'ards came later.

XI

When people first came to the West, particularly from the owned
and fought-over farmlets of Europe, and saw so much land to
be had for the signing of a paper and the building of a founda-
tion, an itching land-greed seemed to come over them. They

15



'wanted more and more land — good land if-possiblej but land,

■ 'anyway. Perhaps they^had filaments of memory of feudal Europe

■ where great families became and remamed great because they,

owned things. The early settlers took up land they didn’t need ,
and coiiidn’t use; they took up worthless land just to own it.
And all proportions changed. A man who might have been weU-
to-do on ten acres in Europe was rat-poor on two thousand in
California. , . •

It wasn’t very long until all the land in the barren htils near
King City and San Ardo was taken up, and ragged families were
scattered tfiough the hills, trying their best to scratch a living
from the thin flinty soil. They and the coyotes lived clever, des-
pairing, sub-marginal lives. They landed with no money, no, ■
equipment, no tools, no credit, and particularly with no know-
ledge of the new country^ and no technique for using it. I don’t
know whether it \ras a divine stupidity or a great faith that let
them do it. Surely such venture is nearly gone from the world.'
And the families did survive and grow. They had a tool or a
weapon that is also nearly gone, or perhaps it is only dormant
for a while. It is argued that because they believed thoroughly in

■ a just, moral God they could, put their faith there and let the
smaller securities take care of themselves. But I think that be-
cause they trusted themselves and respected themselves as indi-
"iduals, because thei' knew beyond doubt that they were valuable

potentially moral units — because of this they could give
God their own courage and dignity and then receive it back;
Suck things have disappeared perhaps because men do not trust
■themselves any more, and when that happens there is nothing
left except perhaps to find some strong sure man, even though

■ be may be wrong, and to dangle from his coat-tails.

While many people came to the Salinas Valley penniless, there
.. -were others who, having sold out somewhere else, arrived with
. mo.ney to start a new life. These usually bought land, but good
■ land, and built their houses of planed lumber, and had carpets
arid coloured-glass diamond panes in their windows. There were
, numbers of these families and they got the good land of the val-
ley and cleared the yellow mustard away and planted wheat.

Siich a man was Adam Trask. ' ■



CHAPTER 3


I ' '

AdamTrask was bom on a farm on the outskirts of a little
town which was not far from a big town in Connecticut. He was
an only son, and he was born six months after his . father was
mustered into a Connecticut regiment in 1862. Adam’s mother
ran the farm, bore Adam, and still had time to embrace a primi-
tive theosophy. She felt that her husband would surely be killed
by the wild and barbarous rebels, and she prepared herself to get
in touch with him in what she called the beyond. He came home
six weeks after Adam was born. His right leg was off at tlie
knee. He stumped in on a crude wooden leg he himself had
carved out of beechwood. And already it was splitting. He had
in his pocket and placed on the parlour table the lead bullet they
had given him to bite while they cut off his frayed leg.

Adam’s father Cyrus was something of a devil -had always
been wild — drove a two-wheeled cart too fast, and managed to
make his wooden leg seem jaunty and desirable. He had enjoyed
his military career, what there was of it. Being wild by nature,'
he had liked his brief period of training and the drinking and
gambling and whoring that went with it. Then he marched
south with a group of replacements, and he enjoyed that too-
seeing the country and stealing chickens and chasing rebel girls
up into the haystacks. The grey, despairing weariness of pro-
tracted manoeuvres and combat did not touch him. The first
time he saw the enemy was at eight o’clock one spring morning,
and at eight-thirty he was hit in the right leg by a hea\Tr slug
that mashed and splintered the bones beyond repair. Even then
he was lucky, for the rebels retreated and the field surgeons^
moved up immediately. Cyrus Trask did have his five minutes '
of horror while they cut the shreds away and sawed the bone off
square and burned the open flesh. The tooth-marks in the bul-
let proved that. And there was considerable pain while the
wound healed under the unusually septic conditions in the hos-
pitals of that day. Tut Cyrus had vitality and swagger. While he
was carving his beechwood leg and hobbling about on a crutch,
he contracted a particularly virulent dose of the clap from a
. negro girl who whistled at him from under a pile of lumber and
charged him ten cents. When he had his new leg, and painfully
knew his condition, he hobbled about for days, looking for the

17



girl. He told his bunk-mates xvhat he was going to do when he
found her. He planned to cut off her ears and her nose with his ,
pocket-knife and get his money back. Carving on his ■ wooden-
leg he showed his friends how he would cut her. ‘When I finish
her she’ll be a funny-looking bitch/ he said. ‘I’ll make her so a
drunk Indian won’t take out after her.’ His ligHt-of-lovc must
have sensed his intentionSj for he never found her. By the time
Cyrus was released from the hospital and the army, his gonor-
rhea was dried up. When he got home to Connecticut there re-
mained only enough of it for his wife.

Mrs Trask was a pale, inside-herself woman. No heat of sun
ever, reddened her cheeks, and no open laughter raised the cor-
ners of her mouth. She used religion as a therapy for the ills' of
the world and of herself, and she changed the reh'gion to fit the
ill. When sh'e found that the theosophy she had developed for
communication with a dead husband was not necessary, she cast
about for some new unhappiness. Her search was quickly re-
warded by the infection Cyrus brought home from the war. And
as soon as she was aware that a condition existed, she devised a
new theolog)’. Her god of commumcation" became a god of ven-
' geance-to her the most satisfactor>’ deity she had devised so far
-and, as it nimed out, the last. It was quite easy for her to
attribute her condition to cenain dreams she had experienced
while her husband was away. But the disease was not punish-
ment enough for her nocturnal philandering. Her new god was
an expert in pumshment. He demanded of her a sacrifice. She

egotistical humility and'
almost happily amved at the sacrifice - herself . It took her wo
w^ks to write her last letters with revisions and corrected spell-
mg. In It she confessed to crimes she could not possibly have
committed and admitted faults far beyond her capacity 2td'
then’ dressed in a secretly made shroud, she went out on a
■moonbght mght and drmvned herself in a pond so shaUoxv^that
she had to get down on her knees in the mud and hold her head
under water. Tins required great will-power. As the warm un '
consaousn^s finaUy crept over her. she was thinking
citation of how her white lawn shroud would have mud down
thmfront when they pulled her out in the morning. And it did
mourned for his wife with a keg of whiskx' and
■ ° ^ fnends who had dropped in on their wavlinmp

wakf '^eal at the beginnin Jof the

m ted h- about babies, had nLecied

feed him. Cjtus soon solved the problem. He dipped a^rag in

18



whisky and gave it to the baby to suck, and after three or four
dippings young Adam went to sleep. Several times during the
mourning period he awakened and complained and. got the
dipped rag again and went to sleep. The baby was drunk for two
days and a half. Whatever may have happened in his developing
brain, it proved beneficial to his metabolism ; front that Uvo and
a half days he gained an iron health. And when, at the end of
three da3^s his father finally went out and bought a goat, Adam
drank the milk greedily, vomited, drank more, and was on his
-way. His father did not find the reaction alarming, since he was
doing the same thing. ■ ' ■ ■■

Within a month Cjtus Trask’s choice fell on the seventeen-
year-old daughter of a neighbouring farmer. The courtship was
quick and realistic. There was no doubt in anybody’s' mind
about his intentions. They were honourable and reasonable. Her
father abetted the courtship. He had two younger daughters, and
Alice, the eldest, was seventeen. This was her first proposal.

Cyrus wanted a woman to take care of Adam. He needed
someone to keep house and cook, and a servant cost money. He
was a vigorous man and needed the body of a woman, and that
too cost monej'- unless j’Ou were married to it. Within two'
weeks Cyrus had wooed, wedded, bedded, and impregnated her. .
His neighbours did not find his action hasty. It was quite nor- ,
mal in that day for a man to use up three or four tvives in a



,roof of his soldiering.and a guarantee
lave to do it again. Timidly' he began

iampaigns, but as his technique grew so did his battik. At the
i^ery first -he, knew be was lying, but it was not long before he
was equally sure that every one of his stories was true. Before he
had entered the service he had not been much interested in war-
fare; now he bought every book about war, read every report,
subscribed to the New. York papers, snidied maps. His know-
ledge of geography had been shaky and his infonnation about
tiie fighting non-existent; now he became an authority. He lutew
not only the battles, movements, campaigns, but also the units
involved, down to the regiments, their colonels', and where they
originated. And from telling he became convinced that he had


been there.

All of this was a gradual dei’dopment, and it took place while
Adam was growing to boyhood and his young half-brother be-
liind him. Adam and little Charles would sit silent and respect-,
ful' while their father e-xplained how every general thought and
planned and where they had made their mistakes and what they
should have done. And then -he had known it at the time- he-


had told Grant and McClellan where they were wrong and had
'• begged them to take his analysis of the situation. Inv'ariably they
■ dused his advice and only afterwards was he proved right.

There was one thing Cyrus did not do, and perliaps it was
clever of him. He never once promoted himself to non-commis-
sioned rank. Private Trask he began, and Private Trask he re-
mained. In the total telling, it made him at once tlie most mobile
and ubiquitous private in the history of warfare. It made it
necessarj' for him to be in as many as four places at once. Blit
perhaps instinctively he did not tell those stories close to each
other. Alice and the boys had a complete picture of him : a pri-
vate soldier, and proud of it, who not only happened to be
where every spectacular and important action was taking place
but who wandered freely into staff meetings and joined or dis-
sented in the decisions of general officers.

The death of Lincoln caught Cyrus in the pit of the stomach.
Always he remembered how he felt when he first heard the news.
And he could never mention it or hear of it without quick tears
in his eyes. And while he never actually said it, juu got the in-
dffitructible impression that Private Cyrus Trask was one of
Lmcoln’s closest, warmest, and most trusted friends. When Mr
Lincoln wanted to know about the army, the real army, not those
prancing dummies in gold braid, he turned to Private Trask.


an



Quite early he began to write letters and then articles about'
the conduct of the war, and his conclusions were intelligent and
convincing. Indeed, Cyrus developed an excellent military mind.
His criticisms both of the war as it had been conducted and of
the army organization as it persisted were irresistibly penetrat-
ing. His articles in various magazines attracted attention. His
letters to the War Department, printed simultaneously ‘.in the
newspapers, began- to have a sharp effect in decisions on th?
army. Perhaps if the Grand Army of the Republic had not as-
sumed political force and direction his voice might not have
been heard so clearly in Washington, but the spokesman for a
block of nearly a million men was not to be ignored. And such a
voice in military matters Cyrus Trask became. It came about
that he was consulted in matters of army organization, in officer
relationships, in personnel and equipment. His expertness was
apparent to everyone who heard him. He had a genius for the
military. More than that, he was one of those responsible for the
organization of the GAR as a cohesive and potent force in the
national life. After several unpaid offices in that organization, he
took a paid secrctarj'ship which he kept for the rest of his life.
He travelled from one end of the country to the other, attending
conventions, meetings, and encampments. So much for his pub-
lic life.

His private life was also laced through tvith his new profes-
sion, He was a man devoted. His house and farm he organized
on military basis. He demanded and got reports on the con-
duct of his private economy. It is probable that Alice preferred
it this way. She was not a talker. A terse report was easiest for
her. She was busy with the growing boys and with keeping the -
house clean and the clothes washed. Also, she had to conserve her
energy, though she did not mention this, in any of her reports.
Without warning her energy would leave her, and she would
have to sit down and wait until it came back. In the night she
would be drenched with perspiration. She knew perfectly well
that she had what was called consumption, would have known
even if she v/as not reminded by a hard, exhausting cough. And
she did not know how long she would live; Some people wasted
on for quite a few years. There wasn’t any rule about it. Per-
haps she -didn’t dare to mention it to her husband. He had

■ 21 , ' • '



levised a method of dealing with sickness which resembled,
mnishment. A stomach-ache was treated with a purge so yio-' .
ent that it was a wonder anyone survived it. If she had men-
ioned her condition, Cyrus might- have started a treatment
which would have kiUed her off before her consumption could
iiavc dohedt. Besides, as Cyrus became more military, his wife
learned the only technique through which a soldier can survive. ,
She never made herself noticeable, never spoke unless spoken to,
performed tyhat was expected and no more, and tried for no
promotions. She became a rear rank private. It was much easier ,
that w'ay. Alice retired to the background until she was .barely,
visible at all. ,

It w^ the little boys who really caught it. Cj'rus had decided
that even though the army was not perfect, it was still the only
■honourable profession for a man. He mourned the fact that he
could not be a permanent soldier because of his wooden leg, but,
he could not imagine any career for his sons except the army.
.-He felt a man should learn soldiering from the ranks, as he had.
Then he would know what it was about from experience, not
from charts and textbooks. He taught them the manual of arms
when they could barely w'alk. By the time they were in grade
school, close-order drill was as natural as breathing and as hate-;

, ful as hell. He kept them hard with exercises, beating out the
' rhythm with a stick on liis wooden leg. He made them walk for
miles, carrying knapsacks loaded with stones to make their
shoulders strong. He worked constantly on tlieir marksmanshi;^'
in the wood-lot behind the house.

1 1

When a ciiild first catches adults out - when it first walks into
his grave little head that adults do not have divine intelligence,
that their judgements are not always wise, tlieir thinking true,
their. sentences just -his world falls into panic desolation. The
gods are fallen and all safety gone. And there is one sure thing
about the fall of gods : they do not fall a little; they crash and
shatter -or sink deeply into green muck. It is a tedious job to
build them up apin; they never quite shine. And the chOd’s
world is never quite whole again. It is an aching kind of growing.

Adam found his father out. It trasn’t tliat his father changed,
but tlwt some new quality came to Adam. He had always hated
the discipline, as cv-ery normal animal does, but it was just' and
true and inevitable as measles, not to be denied or cursed, only

22


to ^ hated. And then -it was very fast, almost a click in the ■
brain -Adam knew that, for him at least, his father’s methods
had no reference to anj'thing in the world but his father. The
teclmiques and training were not designed for the boys at all buf ■
only to make Cyrus a great man. And the same click in the brain ■■
told Adam that his father was not a great man, that he was, in-
deed, a very strong-willed and concentrated little man wearing a ■
huge busby. Who knows what causes this -a look in the eye, a,
lie found out, a moment of hesitation? — then god comes crash-
ing down in a child’s brain.

Young Adam was always an obedient child. Something in him .. •
shrank from violence, from contention, from the silent shrieking
tensions that can rip at a house. He contributed to the quiet he
wished for by offering no violence, no contention and to do this
he had to retire into secretness, since there is some violence in'
everyone. He covered his life with a veil of vagueness, while be-
hind his quiet eyes a rich full life went on. This did not protect
him from assault but it allowed him an immimity.

His half-brother, Charles, only a little over a year younger,
grew up with his father’s assertiveness. Charles was- a natural
athlete, with instinctive timing and co-ordination and the com-
petitor's will to win over others, which makes for success in the '
world.

Young Charles won all contests with Adam whether they in-
volved skill, or strength, or quick intelh'gence, and won them so
easily that quite early he lost interest and had to find his com-
petition among other children. Thus it came about that a kind
of affection grew between 'the two boys, but it was more like an
association between brother and sister than between brothers.
Charles fought any boy who challenged or slurred Adam and
usually won. He protected Adam from his father’s harsliness
with lies and even with blame-taking. Charles felt for his bro-
ther the affection one has for helpless things, for blind puppies
and new babies.

Adam looked out of his covered brain — out of the long tunnels
of his eyes -at the people of his world. His father, a one-legged
natural -force at first, installed justly .to make little boys feel
littler and stupid boys aware of their stupidity; and then -after
god had crashed — he saw his father as the policeman laid on by
birth, the officer who might be circumvented, or fobled, but..
■ne\’er challenged. And out of the long tunnels of his eyes.Adam
say his half-brother Charles as a bright being of anothr les,
gifted with muscle and bone, speed and alerta^s. < a

23



different plane, to be admired as one admires the sleek lazy
danger of a black leopard, not by any chance to be compared
with oneself. And it would' no more have occurred to Adam to
confide in his brother -to tell him the hunger, the grey dreams,

■ the plans and silent pleasures that lay at the back of the tun-
nelled eyes r than to share his thoughts with a lovely tree or a
pheasant in fiigjht. Adam was glad of Charles the way a woman
is glad of a fat diamond, and he depended on his brother in the
way that same woman depends on the diamond’s glitter and the
self-security tied up in its worth; but love, affection, empathj',-
were beyond conception.

. Towards Alice Trask, Adam concealed a feeling that was akin
to a warm shame. She was not his mother— that he knew because
he had been told many times. Not from things said but from the

■ tone in which other things were said, he knew that he had once
had a mother and that she had done some shameful thing, such
as forgetting the chickens or missing the target on the range in
the wood-lot. And as a result of her fault she was not here.,
Adam thought sometimes that if he could only find out what sin

. it was she had committed, why, he would sin it too - and not be
here.

Alice treated the boys equally, washed them and fed them,
and left everything else to their father, who had let it be known
clearly and witli finality that training the boys physically and
' mentally was his exclusive province. Even praise and reprimand
he would not delegate. Alice never complained, quarrelled,
laughed, or cried. Her mouth was trained to a line that con-
cealed nothing and offered notliing too. But once when Adam

■ was quite small he wandered silently into the kitchen. Alice did
not see him. She was darning socks and she was smiling. Adam
retired secretly and wall;ed out of the house and into the wood-

, lot to a sheltered place behind a stump that he knew well. He
settled deep between the protecting roots. Adam was as shocked
as though he had come upon her naked. He breathed excitedly,
high against his throat. For Alice had been naked - she had been
smiling. He wonderefd how she had dared such wantonness. And
he ached towards her with a longing tliat was passionate and
hot. He did not know what it was about, but all the long lack of
holding, of rocking, of caressing, the hunger for breast and
nipple, and the softness of a lap, and the voice-tone of love and
compassion, and the sweet feeling of anxiety - all these were in
his passion, and he did not know it because he did not know that
such things existed, so how could he miss them.

24



Of course it occurred to him that he might be wrong, that
some misbegotten shadow had fallen across his face and warped
his seeing. And so he cast back to the sharp picture in his head
and knew that the eyes were smiling too. Twisted li^t could do ■
one or the other but not both.

He stalked her then, game-wise, as he had the woodchucks on
the knoll when day after day he had lain lifeless as a young
stone and watched the old wary chucks bring their children out
to sun. He spied on Alice, hidden, and from tmsuspected eye-
corner, and it was true. Sometimes when she was alone, and
knew she was alone, she permitted her mind to play in a garden,
and she smiled. And it was wonderful to see how quickly she ;
could drive the smile to earth the way the woodchucks holed-
their children.

Adam concealed his treasure deep in his tunnels, but he was •
inclined to pay for his pleasiure with something. Alice began to
find gifts -in her sewing basket, in her w’om-out purse, under
her pillow’ — two cinnamon pinks, a bluebird’s tail-feather, half
a stick of green sealing wax, a stolen handkerchief. At first Alice
was startled, but then that passed, and when she found some un-
suspected present the garden smile flashed and disappeared the
way a trout crosses a knife of sunshine in a pool. She asked no
questions and made no comment.

Her coughing was very bad at night, so loud and disturbing
that CjTus had at last to put her in another room or he would
have got no sleep. But he did visit her very of ten - hopping on
his one bare foot, steadying himself w’ith hand on w'all. The boys
could hear and feel the jar of his body through the house as he
hopped to and from Alice’s bed.

As Adam grew he feared one thing more than any other. He
feared the day he would be taken and enlisted in the army. His
father never let him forget that such a time would come. He
spoke of it often. It w'as Adam who needed the army to make a '
man of him. Charles was pretty near a man already. And Charles
was a man, and a dangerous man, even at fifteen, and w’hen
Adam was sixteen.



pointed stick was laid on the ground, then struck near one end
with a bat. The small stick flew into the air and then was batted
as far as possible.

Adam was not good at games. But by some accident of eye
and timing he beat his brother at peewee. Four times he drove
the peewee farther than Charles did. It was a new experience to
him, and a wild flush came over him, so that he did not watch
and feel, out his brother’s mood as he usually did. The fifth time
he drove the peewee it flew humming like a bee far out in the
field. He turned happily to face Charles and suddenly he froze
. deep in his chest. The hatred in Charles’s face frightened him,
‘I guess it was just an accident,’ he said lamely. ‘I bet I couldn’t


do, it again.’

Charles set his peewee, struck it, and, as it rose into the air, ,
struck at it and missed. Charles moved slowly towards. Adam,
his eyes cold and non-committaL Adam edged away in terror.
He did not dare to turn and run, for his brother could outrun
him. He backed slowly away, his eyes frightened and Ms throat
dry. Charles moved close and struck him in the face with his ’
bat. Adam covered his bleeding nose with his hands, and Charles
swung his bat and hit him in the ribs, knocked the wind out of
him, swung at his head and knocked him out. And as Adam lay
unconscious on the ground Charles kicked him heavily in the
stomach and walked away.

After a while Adam became conscious. He breathed shallowly
because his chest hurt. He tried to sit up and fell back at the
wrench of the torn muscles over his stomach. He saw AUce look-
ing out, and there was somethmg in her face that he had never
seen before. He did not know what it was, but it was not soft or
weak, and it might be hatred. She saw that he'was looking at
her, dropped the curtains into place, and disappeared. When ,
Adam finally got up from the ground and moved, bent over, into
, the kitchen, he found a basin of hot water standing ready for
him and a clean towel beside it. He could hear his step-mother
coughing in her room.


Charles had one great quality. He was never sorry -ever. He
ne\'er mentioned the beating, apparently nev'er thought of it,
again. But Adam made very sure that he didn’t win again - at
anything. He had always felt the danger in his brother, but now
he understood that he must never win unless he was prepared to
kill Charles. Charles was not sorry. He had very simply fulfilled
himself.


Charles did not tell his father about the beating, and Adam


26



did not, and surety Alice did not, and yet he seemed to know.
In the months that followed he turned a gentleness on Adani.
His speech became softer towards him. He did not punish him
any more. Almost nightly he lectured him, but not violently.
And Adam was more afraid of the gentleness than he had been
at the violence, for it seemed to him that he was being trained
as a sacrifice, almost as though he was being subjected to kind-
ness before death, the way victims intended for the gods were
cuddled and flattered so that they might go happily to the stone
and not outrage the gods with unhappiness.

Cyrus explained softly to Adam the nature of a soldier. And
though his knowledge came from research rather than experi-
ence, he knew and he was accurate. He told his son of the sad
dignity that can belong to a soldier, how he is, necessary in the
light of all the failures of man -the penalty of our frailties. Per-
haps Cyrus discovered these things in himself as he told them.
It was very different from the flag-waving, shouting bellicosity
of his younger days. The humilities are piled on a soldier, so
Cyrus said, in order that he may, when the time comes, be not
too resentful of the final humility -a meaningless and dirty
death. And Cyrus talked to Adam alone and did not permit
Charles to listen.

Cyrus took Adam to walk with him one late afternoon, and
the black conclusions of all of his study and his thinking came
out and flowed with a kind of thick terror over his son. He said,
‘I’ll have you know that a soldier is the most holy of all humans
because he is the most tested -most tested of all. I’ll try to tell
you. Look now — in all of history men have been taught that
killing of men is an evil thing not to be cotmtenanced. Any man
who lulls must be destroyed because this is a great sin, maybe
the worst sin we know. And then we take a soldier and put mur-
der in his hands and we say to him, “Use it well, use it wisely.”
We put no checks on him. Go out and kill as miny of a certain
kind or classification of your brothers as you can. And we
\vill revvard you for it because it is a violation of your early
training.’

Adam wet his dry lips and tried to ask and failed and tried
again. ‘Why do they have to do it?’ he said. “Why is it?’

Cyrus was deeply moved and he spoke as he had never spoken
before. ‘I don’t know,’ he' said. T’ve studied and maybe learned
how things are, but I’m not even close to why, they are. And you
must not expect to find that people understand ^vhat they do.
■So many things are done instinctivdy, the way a bee m^es

27



pointed stick was laid on the ground, then struck near one end ’
with a bat. The small stick flew into the air and then w'as batted

as far as possible. ■ c

■ Adam was not good at games. But by some accident of eye
and timing he beat his brother at peewee. Four times, he drove
the peewee farther than. Charles did. It was a new ^penence to
him, and a wild flush came over him, so that he did not watch
anddeel out his brother’s mood as he usually did. The fifth time .
he drove the peewee it flew humming like a bee far out in the
field. He turned happily to face Charles and suddenly he froze
. deep in his chest. The hatred in Charles’s face frightened him. ,
‘I guess it was just an accident,’ he said lamely. ‘I bet I couldn’t
do it again.’ ■

' Charles set his peewee, struck it, and, as it rose into the air,
struck at it and missed. Charles moved slowly towards Adam,
his eyes cold and non-committal. Adam edged away in terror.

He did not dare to turn and run, for his brother could outrun
him. He backed slowly away, his eyes frightened and Iiis throat
dry. Charles mov'ed close and struck him in the face with his •
bat. Adam covered his bleeding nose with his hands, and Charles
swung his bat and hit him in the ribs, knocked the wind out of- ,
him, swung at liis head and knocked him out. And as Adam lay .
unconscious on the ground Charles kicked him heavily in the
stomach and walked away.

After a while Adam became conscious. He breathed shallowly
because his chest hurt. He tried to sit up and fell back at the
wrench of the torn muscles over his stomach. He saw Alice look-
ing out, and there was something in her face that he had never
seen before. He did not know what it was, but it was not soft or
weak, and it might be hatred. She saw that he-was looking at
her, dropped the curtains into place, and disappeared. When
Adam finally got up from the ground and moved, bent over, into
the kitchen, he found a basin of hot water standing ready for
him and a clean towel beside it. He could hear his step-mother
coughing in her room. . '

Charles had one great quality. He was never sorry -ever. ^
never mentioned the beating, apparently never thought of Ii"
again. But Adam made very sure that he didn’t win again - «
annulling. He had always felt the danger in his brother, but jio
he understood that he must never win unless he was prepared
kill Charles. Charles was not sorry. He had very simplv fidfu
himself.

Cliarles did not tell his father about the beating, and A

26



were, b^use- because they have lost a littleness of vanity and
have gained all the gold of the companj' and the regiment.- If ’
you can go dowm so low, you will be able to rise higher than you
can conceive, and you will know a holy joy, a companionship
almost like that of a heavenly company of angels. Then you will
know the quality of men even if the\' are inarticulate. But until
you have gone way douni you can ne\'er know this.'

As they walked back towards the house C3rrus turned left and
entered the wood-lot among the trees, and it was dusk. Suddenly
Adam said, ‘You see that stump there, sir? I used to hide be-
tween the roots on the far side. After you punished me I used to
hide there, and sometimes I went there just because I felt bad.'’

‘Let’s go and see the place,’ his father said. Adam led him to
it, and Cyrus looked down at the nest-like hole between the •
roots. ‘I knew about it long ago,’ he said. ‘Once when you were
gone a long time I thought you must have such a place, and I
found it because I felt the kind of a place you would need. See
how the earth is tamped and the little grass is tom? And while
you sat in there you stripped little pieces of bark to shreds. I
knew it was the place v/hen I came upon it.’

Adam was staring at his father in wonder. ‘You never came
here loolnng for me,’ he said.

‘No,’ CiTus repUed. ‘I wouldn’t do that. You can drive a
human too far. I wouldn’t do that. Alwaj's you must leave a man
one escape before death. Remember that! I knew, I guess, how
hard I was pressing you. I didn’t want to push 5'ou over the
edge.’

They moved restlessly off through the trees. Cyrus said, ‘So
many things I want to tell you. I’ll forget most of them. I vrant
to tell 5*ou that a soldier' gives up so much to get something
back. From the day of a child’s birth be is taught by every cir-
cumstance, by every' law and rule and right, to protect his own
life. He starts with that great instinct, and everything confirms
it. And then he is a soldier and he must leam to wolate all of
this — he must leam coldly' to put himself in the way of losing
his own life without going mad. And if you can do that -and,
mind you, Tome can’t— then you will have the greatest gift of
all. Look, son,’ Cyrus said earnestly, ‘nearly all men are afraid,
and they don’t even know what^causes their fear -shadows, per-
plexities, dangers without names or numbers, fear of a faceless
death. But if you can bring yourself to face not shadows but real
death, described and recognizable, by bullet or sabre, arrow or
lance, then you need never be afraid again, at least not in the-

29



Wey or a fox dips:his paws in a stream, to fool dogs. A fox
ain’t say why he does it, and what bee remembers winter or ex-
■ peers it to come again? When I knew you had to go I thought
to leave the future open so you could dig out 5'our own findings,
and then it seemed better if I could protect you with the little I
know. You’ll go in soon now - you’ve come to the age. - .

“I don’t want to,’, said Adam quickly. , ^ ; _

‘You’ll go in soon,’ his father went on, not hearing. ‘And I
' want .to-tell you so you won’t be surprised. They’ll first strip off '
your clothes; but they’ll go deeper than that. They’lh shuck off
any ' little dignity you have - you’ll lose what you think of as
' your decent right to live and to be let alone to live. The5r’ll make
you -live and eat and sleep and shit close to other men. And when
-■ they dress you up again you’ll not be able to tell yourself from
the others. You can’t even wear a scrap or pin a note on your
breast to say, “This is me - separate from the rest.” ’

‘I don’t want to do it,’ said Adam.

‘After a while,’ said Cyrus, ‘you’ll think no thought the others
do not think. You’ll know no word the others can’t say. And
you’ll do things because the others do them. You’ll fed the dan-
ger in any difference whatever -a danger to the whole crowd of
like-thinking, like-acting men.’

‘What if I don’t?’ Adam demanded.


\ ‘Yes,’ said Cyrus, ‘sometimes that happens. Once in a while ■
there is a man who won’t do what is demanded of him, and do
you know what happens? The whole machine devotes itself
coldly to the destruction of his difference. They’ll beat your
spirit and your nerves, your body and your mind, with iron rods
until the dangerous difference goes out of you. if you can’t
finally give in, they’ll vomit you up and .leave you stinking out-
side -neither part of themselves nor yet free. It’s better to fall in
with them. They only do it to protect themselves. A , thing so
triumphantly illogical, so beautifully senseless as an army can’t
allow a question to weaken it. Witliin itself, if you do not hold
it up to other things for comparison and derision, you’ll firid.
slowly, surely, a reason and a logic and a kind of dreadful,
beauty. A man who can accept it is not a worse man always, and
sometimes is a much better man. Pay good heed to me, for I
Iiave .thought long about it. Some men there are who go down
the dismal wrack of soldiering, surrender themselves and become
faceless. But these had not much face to start with. And maybe
you’re like that. But there are others who go down, submerge in
die common slough, and then rise more themselves than they


28


were, because -because they have lost a littleness of vanity and
have gained all the gold of the company and tire regiment. If
you can go down so low, you vdll be able to rise higher than you
can conceive, arid you will know a holy joy, a companionship
almost hke that of a heavenly company of angels. Then j’ou will
know the quality of men even if they are inarticulate. But until
you have gone way down you can never know this.’

As tliey walked back towards the house Cjttus turned left and
entered the wood-lot among the trees, and it was dusk. Suddenly
Adam said, ‘You see that stump there, sir? I used to hide be-
tween the roots on the far side. After you pimished me I used to
hide there, and sometimes I went there Just because I felt bad;’

‘Let’s go and see the place,’ his father said. Adam led him to
it, and Cyrus looked down at the nest-like hole between the
roots. ‘I knew about it long ago,’ he said. ‘Once when you were
gone a long time I thought you must have such a place, and I
found it because I felt the kind of a place you would need. See
how tire earth is tamped and the little grass is torn? And while
you sat in there you stripped little pieces of bark to shreds. I
knew it was the place when I came upon it.’

Adam was staring at his fatlrcr in wonder. ‘You never came
here looking for me,’ he said.

‘No,’ CjTUS replied. ‘I wouldn’t do that. You can drive a
human too far. I wouldn’t do that. Always you must leave a man
one escape before death. Remember that! I knew, I guess, how
hard I was pressing j'ou. I didn’t want to push you over the
edge.’

They moved restlessly off through the trees. Cjtus said, ‘So
many things I want to tell you. I’ll forget most of them. I want
to tell you that a soldier' gives up so much to get something
back. From the day of a child’s birth he is taught by every cir-
cumstance, by every law and rule and right, to protect his own
life. He starts with that great instinct, and everything confirms
it. And then he is a soldier and he must learn to violate all of
this -he must learn coldly to put himself in the way o'f losing
his own life without going mad. And if you can do that -and,
mind you, some can’t - then you will have the greatest gift of
all. Look, son,’ Cyrus said earnestly, ‘nearly all men are afraid,
and they don’t even know what^causes their fear - shadows, per-
plexities, dangem without names or numbers, fear of a faceless
death. But if you can bring yourself to face not shadows but real
death, described and recognizable, by bullet or sabre, arrow or
lance, then you need never be afraid again, at least not in the

29



same way you were before. Then .you wUI be a man set apart
from other men, safe where other men may crj' m terror. This is
the great reward. Maybe this is the only reward. Maybe this is
the final purity' aU ringed with filth. It’s nearly dark. I’U W'ant to
talk to'you again tomorrow night when both of us have thought

about what I’ve told you.’ ^ \

But Adam said, . ‘Why don’t you talk to my brother? Charles
will be going. He’ll be good at it, much better than I am.’

‘Charles vvon’t be going,’ Cyrus said. ‘There’d be no point in


it.’ '

' ‘But'he would be a better soldier.’ , ”

‘Only outside on his skin,’ said Cyrus. ‘Not inside. Charles is
not afraid, so .he could never learn anything about courage. He .
does not know anything outside himself, so he could never gain
the Aings I’ve tried to explain to you. To put him in an army
would be . to let loose things which in Charles must be chained
■ down, not let loose. I would not dare to let him go.’

Adam complained, ‘You never punished him, j'ou let him live ■
his own life, you praised him, you did not haze him, and now
. you let him stay out of the army.’ He stopped, frightened, at
what he had said, afraid of the rage or the contempt or the vio-
lence his words might let loose.

His father did not reply. He walked on out of the wood-lot, .
and his head hung down so that his chin rested on his chest, and
rise and fall of his hip when his wooden leg struck the
iijound was monotonous. The wood leg made a side-semicircle
' . to get ahead when its turn came.

It was completely dark by now, and the golden light of. the
lamps shone out from the open kitchen window. Alice came to
the doorway and peered out, looking for them, and then she
heard the uneven footsteps approaching and went back to the
kitchen.

Cyrus walked to the kitchen stoop before he stopped and
raised his head. ‘Where are you?’ he asked.

'Here - right behind you - right here.’

‘You asked a question. I guess I’ll have to answer. Maybe it’s
good and maybe it’s bad to answer. You’re not clever. You don’t
know what you want. You have no proper fierceness. You let
other people walk over you. Sometimes I think 5'ou’re a weakling
who will never amount to a dog turd. Does that answer your
question? I loVe you better. I always have. This may be a bad
thing to tell you, but it s true. I love you better. Else why would
I have given myself the trouble of hurting you? Now shut your


30



moutli and go to your supper. I’ll talk to you tomorrow night.
My leg aches.’


IV

There was no talk at supper. The quiet was disturbed only by
the slup of soup and gnash of chewing, and his father waved
his hand to try to drive the moths away from the chimney of the
kerosene lamp. Adam thought his broker watched him secretly.
And he caught an eye-flash from Alice when he looked up sud-
denly. After he had finished eating, Adam pushed back his chair.
‘I think I’ll go for a walk,’ he said.

Charles stood up. ‘I’ll go with you.’

Alice and Cyrus watched them go out of the door, and then.
she asked one of her rare questions. She asked nervously, ‘What
did you do?’

‘Nothing,’ he said.

‘Will you make him go?’

‘Yes.’

‘Does he know?’

Cyrus stared bleakly out of the open door into the darkness.
‘Yes, he knows.’

‘He won’t like it. It’s not right for him.’

‘It doesn’t matter,’ Cj'rus said, and he repeated loudly, ‘It
doesn’t matter,’ and his tone said, ‘Shut your mouth. This is not
your affair.’ They were silent a moment, and then he said almost
in a tone of apologj', ‘It isn’t as though he were your child.’
Alice did not reply.

The boys walked down the dark rutty road. Ahead they could
see a few pinched lights where the village was.

‘Want to go in and see if an)n:hing’s stirring at the inn?’
Charles asked.

‘I hadn’t thought of it,’ said Adam.

‘Then what the hell are you walking out at night for?’

‘You didn’t have to come,’ said Adam.

Charles moved close to him. ‘What did he say to you this
afternoon? I saw you walking together. What did he say?’

‘He just talked about the army - like always.’

‘Didn’t look like that to me;’ Charles said suspiciously. ‘I
him leaning close, talking the way he talks to men — not telling,

talking.’ ’ '

‘He was telling,’ Adam said patiently, and he had to. control
his breath, for a little fear had begun to pr^s up against his

■ 31 - ■ '



stomacli; He took as deep a gulp of air as he could and held it to

push back at the fear., • ' ■ . j • '

‘What did he tell you?’ Cltarles demanded again.

‘About the army and how it is to be a soldier.

‘I don’t believe you,’ said Charles. ‘I think you’re a goddam
mealy-mouthed liar. What’re you trying to get away with?’ , ,
.‘Nothing,’ said Adam. . . '

■ Charles said harshly, 'Your crazy moAer drowned herself.
- Maybe she took a look at you. That’d do it.’

Adam let out his breath gently, pressing dowm the dismal fear.


He was silent.

Charles cried, ‘You’re trying to take him away! I don t know
how you’re going about it. What do you think you’re doing?’

‘Nothing,’ said Adam.

' Charles jumped in front of him so that Adam had to stop, liis
chKt almost against his brother’s chest. Adam backed away, but
^carefully, as one backs away from a snake,

‘Look at his birthday ! ’ Charles shouted. ‘I took six bits and I
bought him a knife made in Germany - three blades and a corkr
screw, pearl-handled. Where’s that knife? Do you ever see him
use it? Did he give it to you? I never even saw him hone it.
Have you got that knife in your pocket? What did he do with
it? “'nianks,” he said, like that. And that’s the last I heard of a
X pearl-handled German knife that cost six bits.’

' Rage was in his voice and Adam felt the creqiing feari but

e knev,' also that he had a moment left. Too many times he had
seen the destructive machine that chopped dorni anything
standing in its way. Rage came first and then a coldness, a pos-
session; non-committal eyes and a pleased smile and no voice at
all, only a whisper. When that happened murder was on- the
way, but cool, deft murder, and hands that worked precisely,
delicately, Adam swallowed saliva to dampen his dry throat. He
could thixdc of nothing to say that would be heard, for once in
rage bis brother would not listen, would not even hear. He
bulked darkly in front of Adam, shorter, wider, thicker, but
still not crouched. In the starlight his lips shone with wetness,
but there was no smile yet and his voice still raged.

‘What did you do on his birthday? You think I didn’t see?
Did you spend sLx bits or even four bits. You brought him a
rnongrel pup you had picked up in the wood-lot. You laughed
like a fool and said it would make a good bird dog. That dog
sleeps in his room. He plays with it while he’s reading. He’s got
it all trained. And where’s the knife? "Thanks," he said, just


32



“Thanks”.’ Charles spoke in a whisper and his shoulders dropped.

Adam made one desperate jump backwards and raised his
liands to guard his face. His brother moved precisely, each foot
' planted firmly. One fist lanced delicately to get the range, and
then the bitter-frozen work-a mrd blow in the stomach, and
Adam’s hands dropped; then four punches to the head. Adam
felt the bone and gristle of his nose crunch. He raised his hands
again and Charles drove at his heart. And all this time Adam
looked at his brother as the condemned look hopelessly and
puzzled at the executioner.

Suddenly, to his own surprise, Adam launched a wild, over-
hand, harmless swing which had neither force nor direction.
Charles ducked in and imder it and the helpless arm went
around his neck. Adam wrapped his arms around his brother
and hung close to him, sobbing. He felt the square fists whip-
ping nausea into his stomach and still he held on. Time was
slowed to him. With his body he felt his brother move sideways
to force his legs apart. And he felt the knee come up, past his
knees, scraping his thighs, until it crashed against his testicles
and flashing white pain ripped and echoed through his body.
His arms let go. He bent over and vomited, while the cold killing
went on.

Adam felt the punches on temples, cheeks, eyes. He felt his lip
split and tatter over his teeth, but his skin seemed thickened and
dull, as tliough he were encased in heav^' rubber. Dully he won-
dered why his legs did not buckle, why he did not fall, why un-
consciousness did not" come to him. The punching continued
eternally. He could hear his brother panting with the quick ex-
plosive breath of a sledge-hammer man, and in the sick starlit
dark he could see his brother tlirough the tear-watered blood
that flowed from his eyes. He saw the innocent, non-committal
eyes, the small smile on wet lips. And as he saw these things - a
flash of light and darkness.

Charles stood over him, gulping air like a run-out dog. And
then he -turned and walked quickly back, towards the house,
kneading his bruised Imuckles as he went.

Consciousness came back quick and frightening to Adam.
His mind rolled in a painful mist. His body was heavy and
thick with hurt: But almost instantly he forgot his hurts. He
-heard quick footsteps on the road. The instinctive fear and
fierceness of a rat came over him. He pushed himself up on his
knees and dragged himself off the road to the ditch that kept.it
drained. There was a foot of water in the ditch, ap'^ tall

33



'mass grew up from its sides. Adam crawled quietly into the
water, being very careful to. make no splash. ,

■ The footsteps came close, slowed, moved on a little, catne
back. From his. hiding-place Adam could see only a ^rkness m
the dark. And then a. sulphur match was struck and burned a
tiny blue until the wood caught, lighting his brother’s face gro-
tesquely from , below. Charles raised the match and peered
around, and Adam could see the hatchet in his right hand.

When the, match went out the night was blacker than before.
Charles moved slowly on and struck another match, and on and
struck another. He searched the road for signs. At last he gave
it up. His right hand rose and he threw the hatchet far off into
. the field. He walked rapidly away towards the pinched lights of.


the village.

■ ' For a long time Adam lay in the cool water. He wondered
how Tiis', brother felt, wondered whether now that his passion
was chilling he would feel panic or sorrow or sick consciehce or
nothing. These things Adam felt for him. His conscience -bridged
him to his brother and did his pain for him the way at other
times he had done his homework.

Adam crept out of the water and stood up. His hurts were
stiffening and the blood was dried in a crust on his face. He,
thought he would stay outside in the darkness until his father
and Alice went to bed. He felt that he could not answer any
1 questions, because he did not know any answers, and trying to
find one was harsh to his battered mind. Dizziness edged with
blue lights came fringing his forehead, and he knew that he
would be fainting soon.

He shuffled slowly up the road with wide-spread legs. At the
stoop he paused, looked in. The lamp hanging by its chain from
the ceiling cast a yellow circle and lighted Alice and her mend-
ing-basket on the table in front of her. On the other side his'
fatlier chewed a wooden pen and dipped it in an open ink bottle
and made entries in his black record book.

Alice, glancing up, saw Adam’s bloody face. Her liand rose to
her mouth and her fingers hooked over her lower teeth.

Adam drag-footed up one step and then the other and sup-
ported himself in the doorway.

Then Cjtus raised his head. He looked with a distant curi-
osity. The identity of the distortion came to him slowly. He
stood up, puzzled and wondering. He stuck the wooden pen in
the ink bottle and wiped his fingers on his trousers. ‘Why did he
do it.^’ CjTus asked softly.


34



Adam tried to answer, but his mouth was caked and dry,. He'
licked his lips and started them bleeding again. ‘I don’t know,’
he said.

Cyrus stumped over to him and grasped him .by the arm so
fiercely that he winced and tried to pull away. ‘Don’t lie to me!
Why did he do it? Did you have an argument?’

‘No.’

Cyrus wrenched at him. ‘Tell me! I want to know. Tell me!
You’ll have to tell me. I’ll make you tell me ! Goddam it, you’re
always protecting him ! Don’t you think I know that? Did you
tliink you were fooling me? Now tell me, or by God I’ll keep
ybu standing there all night ! ’

Adam cast about for an answer. ‘He doesn’t think you love
him.’

Cj-Tus released the arm and hobbled back to his chair and sat
down. He rattled the pen in the ink bottle and looked blindly at
his record book. ‘Alice,’ he said, ‘help Adam to bed. You’ll have
to cut his shirt off, I guess. Give him a hand.’ He got up again,
went to the comer of the room where the coats hung on nails
and, reaching behind the garments, brought out his shotgun,
broke it to verify its load, and clumped out of the door.

Alice raised her hand as though she would hold him back with
a rope of air. And her rope broke and her face hid her thoughts.
'Go in your room,’ she said. ‘I’ll bring some water in a basin.’

Adam lay on the bed, a sheer pulled up to his waist, and Alice
patted the cuts with a linen handkerchief dipped in warm
water. She was silent for a long time and then she continued
Adam’s sentence as though there had never been an interval, ‘He
doesn’t think his father loves him. But you love him -you
always have.’

Adam did not answer her.

She went on quietly, ‘He’s a strange boy. You have to know
him -all rough shell, all anger until you Imow.’ She paused to
cough, leaned down and coughed, and when the spell was over
her cheeks were flushed and she was exhausted. ‘You have to
know him,’ she repeated. ‘For a long time he has given me h'ttle
presents, pretty things jmu wouldn’t think he’d even notice. But
he doesn’t give them right out. He hides them where he Imows
I’ll find them. And you can look at him for hours and he won’t
ever give the slightest sign he did it. You have to know him.’

She smiled at Adam and he closed his e3'es.


35


CHAPTER 4

I

Charles stoob at the bar in the village inn and Charles
was laughing delightedly at the funny stories the night-stranded
drummers were telling. He got out his tobacco sack -

meagre jingle of silver and bought the men a drink to keep them
talking. He stood and grinned and rubbed his split knuckles.
And when the drummers, accepting his drink, raised their
•glasses and said, ‘Here’s to you,’ Charles was delighted. He
ordered another drink for his new friends, and then he joined
them for some kind of deviltry in another place.

When Cyrus stumped out into the night be was filled with a
, kind of despairing anger at Charles. He looked on the road for
lus son, and he went to the inn to look for him, but Charles was.
gone. It is probable that if he had found him that night he
would have killed him, or tried to. The direction of a big act
will warp historj', but probably all acts do the same in their
degree, down to a stone stepped over in the path or a breath
caught at sight of a pretty girl or a finger-nail nicked in the
N garden soil.

Naturally it was 'not long before Charles was told that his
father was looking for him with a shotgun. He hid out for two
weeks, and when he finally did return, murder had sunk back to
simple anger and he paid his penalty in overtvork and a false,
theatrical humility.

Adam lay four days in bed, so stiff and aching that he could
not move without a groan. On the third day his father gave evi-
dence of his power with tlie military. He did it as a poultice to
his own pride and also as a kind of prize for Adam. Into the
house, into Adam’s bedroom, came a captain of cavalry and two
■ sergeants in dress uniform of blue. In the door-yard their horses
were held by two privates. Lying in his bed, Adam was enlisted
in the army as a private in the cavalry'. He signed the Articles of
war and took tlie oath while his father and Alice looked on. And
. his father's eyes glistened with tears.

After the soldiers had gone his father sat with him a long
time, ‘I’ve put you in the cavalry' for a reason,’ he said. ‘Barrack
life is not a good life for long. But the cavalry has work to do.
I made sure of tlrat. You'll like going for the Indian country.

36 ■ ,



There’s action coming. I can’t teU you how I know. Thete’s
fighting on the way.’ ;

‘Yes, sir/ Adam said.

II

It has always seemed strange to me that it is usually men like
Adam who have to do the soldiering. He did not like fighting to
start with, and far from learning to love it, as some men do, he
felt an increasing revulsion for violence. Several times his offi- .
cers looked closely at Iiim for malingering, but no charge was
brought. During these five years of soldiering Adam did more
detail work than any man in the squadron, but if he killed an
enemy it was an accident of ricochet. Being a marksman and
sharpshooter, he was peculiarly fitted to miss. By this time the
Indian fighting had become like dangerous cattle-drives - the
tribes were forced into revolt, driven and decimated, and the
sad, sullen remnants settled on starvation lands. It 'was not nice
work, but, given the pattern of the country’s development, it had
to be done.

To Adam, who was an instrument, who saw not the future
farms but only the torn bellies of fine humans, it was revolting
and useless. When he fired his carbine to miss he was commit-
ting treason against his unit, and he didn’t care. The emotion of
non-violence was building in him until it became a prejudice
like any other thought-stultifying prejudice. To inflict any hurt
on anything for any purpose became inimical to him. He became
obsessed with tliis emotion, for such it surely was, until it
blotted out any possible thinking in its area. Indeed he was com-
, mended three times and then decorated for bravery.

As he revolted more and more from violence, his impulse took
the opposite direction. He ventured his life a number of times to
bring in wounded men. He volunteered for work in field hos-
pitals even when he was exhausted from his regular duties. He .
was regarded by his comrades' with contemptuous affection and.
the unspoken fear men have of impulses they do not tmder-
standi ■ ' _

Charles wrote to his brother regularly — of the farm and the
village, of sick cows and a foaling mare, of the added pasture
and the lightning-struck barn, of Alice’s choking death from her
consumption and his father’s move to a permanent paid position
in the GAR in Washington. As with many people, Charles, who
could not talk, wrote with fullness. He set down his loneliness

37 ■


anO: nis pt:rpiv:.’iJi.Jta, ii'- y“

■ not taow about himself. ■ • , . , i_ u * •

During the time Adam was away he knew his brother better
than ever before or afterwards. In the exchange of letters there
grew a closeness neither of them could have imagined.-

Adam kept one letter from his brother, not because he under-
. stood it completely but, because it seemed to have a covered
meaning he could' not get at. ‘Dear Brother Adam/- the letter
said, ‘I take my pen in hand to hope you are in good health’ - he
always started this way to ease himself gently into, the task of
WTiting. ‘I have not had 3 'our answer to my last letter, but I, pre-
sume -you have other things to do - ha! ha! The rain came wrong •
and damned the' apple blossoms. There won’t be many to eat next
■winter but I will save what I can. Tonight I cleaned the house
and it is wet and soapy and maybe not any cleaner. How do j;ou
- suppose Mother kept it the way she did? It does not looks the
same. Something settles down on it. I don’t know wtot, but if
will not scrub off. But I have spread the dirt around more
. evenly anjnvays. Ha ! ha !

‘Did Father write you anything about his trip? He’s gone
clean out to San Francisco in California for an encampment of
the Grand Army. The Secty. of War is going to be there, and
<■: Father is to introduce him. But this is not any great shucks to

■■ 'Father. He has met the President, three, four times and even
been to supper to the White House. I would like to see the
White House. Maybe you and me can go together when you
come home. Father could put us up for a few days. and he
would be wanting to see you anyways.

T think I bener look around for a Avife. This is a good farm,
and et'en if I’m no bargain there’s girls could do worse than
this farm. What do you think? You did not say if j^ou are going
to come live home when you get out of the army. I hope soi 1
miss j-ou.’

The writing stopped there. There was a scratch on the page
and a splash of ink and then it went on in pencil, but the writ-
ing was different.

In pencil it said, ‘Later. Well, right there the pen give out.
One of the points broke off. I’ll have to buy another pen-point
in the village - rusted right through.’

The words began to flow more smoothly. ‘I guess I should
wait for a new pen-point and not write with a pencil. Only
I was sitting here in the kitchen with the lamp on and I guess I
got to tliinking and it come on late -after twelve, I guess, but I

38


nev-cr looked. Old Black Joe started crowing out in the- hen-
house. Then Mother’s rocking-chair cricked for all the -World
like she was sitting in it. You know I don’t take truck with that;
but it set me minding backwards, you know' how you do some-
times. I guess I’ll tear this letter up maybej because what’s the
good of writing stuff like this.’

The w'ords began to race now as though they couldn’t get out
fast enough. Tf I’m to throw' it away I’d just as well set it down,’
tlie letter said. ‘It’s like the w’hole house was alive and had eyes
everywhere, and like there was people behind the door just ready
to come in if you looked away. It kind of makes my skin crawl.
I w’ant to say - 1 want to say - 1 mean, I never understood -W'ell,
why our father did it. I mean, why didn’t he like that. knife I
bought for him on his birthday. Why didn’t he? It w'as a good,
knife and he needed a good knife. If he had used it or even
honed it, or took it out of his pocket and looked at it -that’s aU
he had to do. If he’d liked it I w'ouldn’t have took out after you.
I had to rake out after j'ou. Seems like to me my mother’s chair
is rocking a little. It’s just the light. I don’t take any truck with
that. Seems like to me there’s something not finished. Seems like
when you half finished a job and can’t think what it tvas. Some-
thing didn’t get done. I shouldn’t be here. I ought to be wan-
dering around the tvorld instead of sitting here on a good farm
looking for a wife. There is something wrong, like it didn’t get
finished, like it happened too soon and left something out. It’s
me should be where you are and you here. I nc\'er thought like
this before. Maybe because it’s late -it’s later than that. I just
looked out and it’s first dawn. I don’t tliink I fell off to sleep.
How could the night go so fast? I can’t go to bed now. I
couldn’t sleep anyways.’

t. The letter was not signed. Maybe Charles forgot he had in-
tended to destroy it and sent it along. But Adam saved it for a
time, and whenever he read it again it gave him a chill and he
didn’t know why.


39



CHAPTERS

O n T H E ranch the little Hamiltons began to grow up, and every
, year there was a new one. George was a tall handsome boy,
gentle and sweet, who had from the first a kind of courtlinKS.
Even as a little toy he was polite and wliat they used to call ‘no
trouble’. From his father he inherited the neatness of clothing ■
and body and hair, and he never seemed ill-dressed even when ■

' he was..George was a sinless boy and grew to be a sinless mart.

• No crime of commission was ever attributed to him, and his
crimes of omission were only misdemeanours. In his middle life,
at about the time such things were known about, it was dis-
■ covered that he had pernicious anaemia. It is possible that his '
virtue lived on a lack of energy.

Behind George, Will grew along, dumpy and stolid. Will had
little imagination but he had great energy. From childhood .on
he was a hard worker, if anyone would tell him what to work
at, and once told he was indefatigable. He was a consert'ative,
not only in politics but in everything. Ideas he found revolu- .
scs. tionary, and he avoided them with suspicion and distaste. Will' ■
lived to live so that no one could find fault with him, and to do
that he had to Eve as nearly like other people as possible.

Maybe his father had something to do with Will’s distaste for
cither change or variation. When Will was a growing boy, his
father had not been long enough in the Salinas Valley to be
thought of as. an ‘old-timer’. He was in fact a foreigner and an •
Irishman. At that time the Irish were much disliked in America.
They were looked upon with contempt, particularly on the East
Coast, but a little of it must have seeped out to the West. And
Samuel had not only variability but was a man of ideas and in-
novations. In small cut-off communities such a man is always
regarded with suspicion until he has proved he is no danger to
the others. A shining man like Samuel could, and can^ cause a
lot of trouble. He might, for example, prove too attractive to the
wives of men who knew they were dull. Then there were his
education and his reading, the books he bought and borrowed,
his knowledge of things that could not be eaten or worn or co-
, habited with, his interest in poetry and his respect for good
writing. If Samuel had been a rich man like the Thornes or the
-Delmars, with their big houses and wide flat lands, he would
have had a great library.


40



The Delmars had a library- nothing but books’ in it and
panelled in oak, Samuel, bj' borrowing, had read miiny more of
the Delmars’ books than the Delmars had. In that day an edu-
cated rich man was acceptable. He might send his sons to col-
lege without comment, might wear a vest and white shirt and
tie in the day-time of a week-day, might wear gloves and keep
his nails clean. And since the lives and practices of rich men
were mj^tcrious, who knows what they could use or not use?
But a poor man - what need had he for poetry or for painting
or for music not fit for singing or dancing? Such things did not
help him bring in a crop or keep a scrap of cloth on his child-
ren’s backs. And if in spite of this he persisted, maybe he had
reasons which would not stand the light of scrutiny.

Take Samuel, for instance. He made drawings of work he in-
tended to do with iron or wood. That was good and understand-
able, e\'cn enviable. But on the edges of the plans he made other
drawdngs, sometimes trees, sometimes faces or animals or bugs,
sometimes just figures that you couldn’t make out at all. And
these caused men to laugh with embarrassed uneasiness. Then,
too, you never knew in advance what Samuel would think or say
or do - it might be anything.

The first fetv years after Samuel came to Salinas Valley there
was a vague distrust of him. And perhaps Will as a little boy
heard talk in tlic San Lucas store. Little boys don’t want their
fathers to be different from other men. Will might have picked
up his conservatism right then. Later, as the other children came
along and grew, Samuel belonged to the valley, and it was proud
of him in the way a man who owns a peacock is proud. Thejf
weren’t afraid of him any more, for he did not seduce their
wives or lure them out of sweet mediocrity. The Salinas Valley
grew fond of Samuel, but by that time Will was formed.

Certain individuals, not by any means always deserving, are
truly beloved of the gods. Things come to them without their
effort or planning. Will Hamilton was one of these. And the
gifts he received were the ones he could appreciate. As a grow-
ing boy Will was lucky. Just as his father could not make money.
Will could not help making it. When Will Hamilton raised
chickens and his hens began to lay, the price of eggs rvent up.
As a young man, when two of his friends who ran a IMe store
came to the point of despondent bankruptcy. Will was asked to
lend them a little money to tide them .over the quarter’s bills, and
they gave him a one-third interest for a pittance. He was not
niggardly. He gave them what they asked for. The store ws on

- 41




her to a secret place far from the house, whetted his pocket-knife
on a stone, and cut the offending halter of speech. And then he
ran away and was sick.

The Hamilton house grew as the family grew. It was designed
to be unfimshed, so that lean-tos could jut out as thej' were
needed. The original . room and kitchen soon disappeared in a
welter of these lean-tos.

Afeanwhile Samuel got no richer. He developed a very bad
patent habit, a disease many men suffer from. He invented a
part of a threshing machine, better, cheaper, and more eflScient
than any in e.Nistence. The patent attorney- ate up his little profit
for the year. Samuel sent his models to a manufacturer, who
promptly rejected the plans and used the method. The next few
years were kept lean by the suing, and the drain stopped only
when he lost the suit. It was his first sharp experience with, the
rule that without money you cannot fight money. But he had
caught the patent fever, and j-ear after year the money made
by^ threshing and by smithing was drained off in patents. The
Hamilton children went barefoot, and their overalls were patched
and food was sometimes scarce, to pay for the crisp blue-prints
with cogs and planes and elevations.

Some men think big and some think h'ttlc. Samuel and his
sons Tom and Joe thought big and George and Will thought
little. Joseph was the fourth son -a kind of mooning boj', greatly
beloved and protected by the whole family. He early discovered
that a smiling helplessness was his best protection from work.
His brothers were tough hard workers, all of them. It was easier
to do Joe’s work than to make him do it. His mother and father
thought him a poet because he wasn’t any good at anything else.
And they so impressed him with this that he wrote glib verses
to prove it. Joe was physically lazy, and probably mentally lazy
too. He day-dreamed out his life, and his mother loved him
more than the others because she thought he was helpless. Actu-
ally he was the least helpless, because he got exactly what he
wanted with a minimum of effort. Joe was the darling of the
family.

In feudal times an inepmess with sw'ord and spear headed a
young man for the Church: in die Hamilton family Joe’s in-
ability properly to function at farm and forge headed him for a '
higher education. He was not sickly or weak but he did. not lift
■ very well; he rode horses badly and d^^ted them. The w'hole
family laughed with affection , %vhen . they thought of Joe tty^S
to ieam to plough; his tortuous first furrow .wound about like

43




places where it seems to refute itself did not confuse her in the
least. And finally she came to a point where she knew it so well
that she went right on reading it without listening.

Liza enjoyed universal respect because she was a good woman '
and raised good children. She could hold up her head anywhere.
Her husband and her children and her grandchildren respected
her- There was a nail-hard strengtit in her, a lack of any com-
promise, a rightness in the face of all opposing wrongness, which
made you hold her in a kind of awe but not in warmth.

Liza hated alcoholic liquors with an iron zeal. Drinking alco-
hol in any form she regarded as a crime against a properly out-
raged deity. Not only would she not touch it herself, but she
resisted its enjoyment by anyone else. The result naturally was
that her husband Samuel and all her children had a good lusty
love for a drink.

Once when he was verj’- ill Samuel asked, TLiza, couldn't I
have a glass of whisky to ease me?’

She set her h'ttle hard chin. ‘Would you go to the throne
of God with liquor on j'our breath? You w'ould not!’ she
said.

Samuel rolled over on his side and went about his illness with-
out ease.

When Liza was about seventy her elimination slowed up and
her doctor told her to take a tablespoon of port wine for medi-
cine. She forced down the first spoonful, making a crooked face,
but it was not so bad. And from that moment she never drew a
completely sober breath. She always took the wine in a table-
spoon, it was always medicine, but after a time she was doing
over a quart a day and she was a much more relaxed and happy
woman.

Samuel and Liza Hamilton got all of their children raised and
well towards adulthood before the turn of the century. It was a
whole clot of Hamiltons growing up on the ranch to the east of
King City. And they were American children and young men
and women. Samuel never w'cnt back to Ireland and gradually
he forgot it entirely. He was a busy man. He had no time for
nostalgia. The Salinas Valley was the world. A trip to Sah'nas
sixty miles to the north at the head of the valley was event
enough for a year, and the incessant work on the ranch, the care
and feeding and clothing of his bountiful family, took most of
his time - but not all. His energy was large.

His daughter Una had become a brooding student, tense and
• dark. He was proud of her wild, exploring mind. Olive was pre-

45




a new set of girls took tlieir place. Mr Hallam,.the innkeeper/
had no part in the arrangement. He could almost say with truth
that he didn’t Imow anything about it. He simply collected five -,
ttacs the normal rent for his three rooms. The girls were as- ■
signed, procured, moved, disciplined, and robbed by a whore-
master named Edwards, who lived in Boston. His girls.movcd in
a slow circuit among the small towns, never staying anywhere
more than two weeks. It was an extremely workable system. A
girl was not in town long enough to cause remark either by citi-
zen or town marshal. They stayed pretty much in file rooihs and
avoided public places. They were forbidden on pain of beating
to drink or make noise or to fall in love witli anyone. Meals were
ser\-ed in their rooms, and the clients were carefully screened.
No drunken man was permitted to go up to them. Every six
months each girl was given one month of vacation to get drunk
and raise hell. On the job, let a girl be disobedient to the rules,
and Mr Edwards personally stripped her, gagged her, and horse-
whipped her within an inch of her life. If she did it again she
found herself in jail, charged with vagrancy and public prostitu-
tion.

The two-week stands had another advantage. Many of the
girls were diseased, and a girl had nearly always gone away by
the time her gift had incubated in a client. There was no one for
a man to get mad at. Mr Hallam kne\v nothing about it, and Mr
Edwards never appeared publicly in his business capacity. He
liad a very good thing in his circuit

The girls were all pretty much alike -big, healthy, lazy, and
dull. A man could hardly tell there had been a cliange. Charles
Trask made it a habit to go to the inn at least once every two
weeks, to creep up to the top floor, do his quick business, and
return to the bar to get mildly drunk.

The Trask house had never been gay, but lived in only by
Charles it took on a gloomy, rustling decay. The lace curtains
were grey, the floors, although swept, grew sticky and dank. The ,
kitchen was lacquered - walk, windows, and ceiling - with grease
from the frying-pans.

The constant scrubbing by the wives who had lived there and
the bi-annual deep-seated scouring had kept the, dirt down.
Charles rarely did more than sweep. He gave up sheets on his
bed and slept between blankets. What good to clean the house
when there was no one to see it? Only on the flights he went to
the inn did he wash himself and put on clean clothes. ■'

Charles developed a restlessness that got him out at dawi^ He

. , , 47




me. I got plenty other scars. It just seetns like I was inarked;
And when I go into town, like ,to the inn, why, people are
always looking at it. I can hear them talking about it when they
don’t know I can hear. I don’t know why they’re so damn
curious about it. It gets so I don’t feel like going in town at all.’


1 1

Adam was discharged in 18S5 and started to beat his way home.
In appearance he had changed little. There was no military car-
riage about him. The cavalry didn’t act that way. Indeed some
units took pride in sloppy posture.

Adam felt that he was sleep-walking. It is a hard thing to-
leave any deeply routined hfe, even if you hate it. In the mom-.'
ing he awakened on a split second and lay awaiting reveille. His
calves missed the hub of leggings and his throat felt naked with-
out its tight collar. He arrived in Chicago, and there, for no rea-
son, rented a furnished room for a week, stayed in it for two
days, went to Buffalo, changed his mind, and moved to Niagara
Falls. He didn’t want to go home, and he put it off as long as
possible. Home was not a pleasant place in his mind. The kind
of feelings he had had tliere were dead in him, and he had a
reluctance to bring them to life. He watched the falls by the
hour. Their roar stupefied and hypnotized him.

One evening he felt a crippling loneliness for the close men in
barracks, and tent. His impulse was to rush into a crowd for
warmth, any crowd. The first crowded public place he could
find was a little bar, thronged and smoky. He sighed with plea-
sure, almost nestled in the human clot the way a cat nestles into
a woodpile. He ordered whisky and drank it and felt warm and
good. He did not see or hear. He simply absorbed the contact.

As it grew late and the men began to drift away, he became
fearful of the time when he would have to go home. Soon he
was alone with the bar-tender, who was rubbing and rubbing-
the mahogany of the bar and trying with his' eyes and his man-
ner to get Adam to go.

T’ll have one more,’ Adam said.

The bar-tender set the bottle out. Adam noticed him for the
first time. He had a strawberry mark on his forehead.

T’m a stranger in these parts,’ said Adam.

‘That’s what we mostly get at the falls,’ the bar-tepder said.

‘I’ve been in the army. Cavalry.’

‘Yeah ! ’ the bar-tender said.


49




At the top of the first flight he looked back. Her head was
raised, and now her chin made a shadow on her throat and her
eyes had no pupils.

His room smelled of dust dampened and dried many times.
He picked a match from his block and scratched it on the side of
the block. He lighted the shank of candle in the japanned
candlestick and regarded the bed -as spineless as a hammock
and covered with a dirty patchwork quilt, the cotton batting
spilling from the edges.

The porch steps complained again, and Adam knew the
woman would be standing in her doorway ready to spray in-
hospitality on the new arrival.

Adam sat down in a straight chair and put his elbows on his
knees and supported his chin in his hands. A lodger down the
hall began a patient, continuing cough against the quiet night.

And Adam knew he could not go home. He had heard old
soldiers teU of doing what he was going to do.

T just couldn’t stand it. Didn’t have no place to go. Didn’t
know nobody. Wandered around and pretty soon I got in a
panic like a kid, and first thing I knowed I’m begging the ser-
' geant to let me back in - like he was doing me a favour.’

Back in Chicago, Adam re-enlisted and asked to be assigned
■ to his old regiment. On the train going west the men of his
squadron seemed very dear and desirable.

While he waited to change trains in ICansas City, he heard his
name called and a message was shoved into his liand - orders to
report to Washington to the office of tlie Secretary of War.
Adam in his five years had absorbed rather than learned never
to wonder about an order. To an enlisted man the high far gods
in Washington were crazy, and if a soldier wanted to keep his
sanity he thought about generals as little as possible.

In due course Adam gave his name to a clerk and went to sit
in an ante-room. His fatlier found him there. It took Adam a
moment to recognize Cyrus, and much longer to get used to
him. Cyrus had become a great man. He dressed like a great
man — black broadcloth coat and trousers, wide black hat, over-
coat with a velvet collar, ebony cane which he made to seem a
sword. And Cyrus conducted himself like a great man. His
speech was slow and mellow, measured and unexcited, his ges-
tures were wide, and new teeth gave him a vulpine smile out of
all proportion to his emotion.

After Adam had realized that this was his father he was still
puzzled. Suddenly he looked down -no wooden leg. The leg

51 -




only a bedroom but a sitting-room beside it, and the toilet was in
a closet right in the bedroom.

Cyrus sat down in a deep chair and sighed. He pulled up his
trouser leg and Adam saw the contraption of iron and leather
and hardwood. Cyrus unlaced the leather sheath that held it on
his stump and stood the travesty-on-flesh beside his chair. ‘It
gets to pinching pretty bad,’ he said.

With the leg off. Iris father became himself again, the self
Adam remembered. He had experienced the beginning of con-
tempt, but now the childhood fear and respect and animosity
came back to him, so that he seemed a little boy testing his
father’s immediate mood to escape trouble.

Cyrus made his preparations, drank his whisky, and loosened
his collar. He faced Adam. ‘Well?’

‘Sir?’

‘Why did you re-enlist?’

‘I - 1 don’t know, sir. I Just wanted to.’

*You don’t like the army, Adam.’

‘No, sir.’

‘Why did you go back?’

'I didn’t want to go home.’

C3TUS sighed and rubbed the tips of his fingers on the arms of
his chair. ‘Are you going to stay in the army?’ he asked.

'I don’t know, sir.’

‘I can get you into West Point. I liave influence. I can get you
discharged so you can enter West Point.’

‘I don’t want to go there.’

‘Are you defying me?’ Cyrus asked quietly.

Adam took a long time to answer, and his mind sought escape
before he said, ‘Yes, sir.’

Cyrus said, ‘Pour me some whisky, son,’ and when he had it
he continued, ‘I wonder if you .know how much influence I
really have. I can throw the Grand Army at any candidate like
a sock. Even the President likes to know what I think about pub-
lic matters. I can get senators defeated and I can pick appoint-
ments like apples. I can make men and I can destroy men. Do
you know that?’

Adam knew more than that. He knew that Cyrus was defend-
ing himself with threats. *¥65, sir. I’ve h^rd.’

‘I could get you assigned to Washington — assigned to me even

teach you your way about.’ ■

‘I’d rather go back to my regiment, sir.’ He saw the shadow of
loss darken his father’s face. . ' —


53



an angry letter about Adam’s re-enlistment against his wishes.
And Cyrus indicated that, in some future, Charles could visit
him in Washington, but he never asked him again.

Charles moved back to the house and lived in a kind of sav-
age filth, taking a satisfaction in overcoming the work of the
grumbling woman.

It was a year before Adam wrote to Charles - a letter of em-
barrassed newsiness building his courage to say, ‘I don’t know
why I signed again. It was like somebody else doing it. Write
soon and tell me how you are.’

Charles did not reply until he had received four anxious let-
ters, and tlien he replied coolly, ‘I didn’t hardly expect j'ou’ any-
way,’ and he went on with a detailed account of farm and
animals.

Time had got in its work. After that Charles wrote right after
New Year’s Day and received a letter from Adam written right
after New Year’s Day. They had grown so apart that there was
little mutual reference and no questions.

Cliarles began to keep one slovenly woman after another.
When they got on his ner\’es he threw them out the way he
would sell a pig. He didn’t like them and had no interest in
whether or not they liked him. He grew away from the village.
His contacts were only with the inn and the postmaster. The vil-
lage people might denounce his manner of life, but one thing he
had which balanced his ugly life e\'en in their eyes. The farm
had never been so well run. Charles cleared land, built up his
walls, improved his drainage, and added a hundred acres to the
farm. More than that, he was planting tobacco, and a long new
tobacco bam stood impressively behind the house. For these
things he kept the respect of his neighbours. A farmer cannot
think too much evil of a good farmer. Charles was spending
most of his money and all of his energy on the farm.




merits from a wash-line. They were all kinds of men -literate
men and ignorant men, clean men and dirty men -but all of
tliem had restlessness in common. They followed warmth and
avoided great heat and great cold. As the spring advanced they
tracked it eastward, and the first frost drove them west and
south. They were brothers to the coyote which, being rvild, lives
close to man and his chicken-yards : they were near towns but
not in them. Associations with other men were for a week or for
a day and then they drifted apart.

Around the little fires where communal stew bubbled there
was all manner of talk and only the personal was unmentionable,
Adam heard of the development of the IWW with its angry
angels. He listened to philosophic discussions, to metaphysics,
to aesthetics, to impersonal experience. His companions for the
night might be a murderer, an unfrocked priest or one who had
unfrocked himself, a professor forced from his warm berth by a
dull facultj^ a lone driven man running from memory, a fallen
arcliangel and a dev'il in training, and each contributed bits of
thought to the fire as each contributed carrots and potatoes and
onions and meat to the stew’. He learned' the technique, of shav-
ing with broken glass, of judging a house before knocking to ask
for a hand-out. He learned to avoid or get along with hostile
police and to evaluate a woman for her warmth of heart

Adam took pleasure in the new life. When autumn touched
the trees he had got as far as Omaha, and without question or
reason or thought he hurried west and south, fled through the
, mountains and arrived with relief in Southern California. He
wandered by the sea from the border north as far as San Luis
Obispo, and he learned to pilfer the tide pools for abalones and
eels and mussels and perch, to dig the sandbars for clams, and to
trap a rabbit in the dunes with a noose of fish-line. And he lay
in the sun-warmed sand, counting the waves.

Spring urged him east again, but more slowly than before.
Summer was cool in the mountains, and the moxmtain people
• were kind as lonesome people arc kind. Adam took a j'ob on a
widow’s outfit near Denver and shared her table and her bed
humbly vmtil the frost drove him south again. He followed the
Rio Grande past Albuquerque and El Paso through the Big
Bend, through ]l.aredo , to Brownsville. He learned Spanish
words for food and pleasme, and he learned that when people
are very poor they still have something to give and the impulse
to give it. He developed a love for poor people he could not have
conceived if he had not been praor himself. And by no’r*he was

57



minimum of pain. It was much more horrible afterwards than
when it was happening. It is a triumph of self-control to see a
man whipped until the muscles of his back show ivhite and
glistening through the cuts and to give no sign of pity or anger
or interest. And Adam learned this.

People are felt rather than seen after the -first few moments.
During his second sentence on the roads of Florida, Adam re-
duced his personality to a minus. He caused no stir, put out no
vibration, became as nearly invisible as it is possible to be. And
when the guards could not feel him, they were not afraid of
him. They gave him the jobs of cleaning the camps, of handing
out the slops to the prisoners, of filling the water buckets.

Adam waited until three days before his second release. Right
after noon tliat day he filled the water buckets and went back to
the little river for more. He filled his buckets with stones and
sank them, and then he eased himself into the water and swam
a long way dowTi-stream, rested and swam farther down. He
kept moving in the water until at dusk he found a place under a
bank with bushes for cover. He did not get out of the water.

Late in the night he heard the hounds go by, covering both
sides of the river. He had rubbed his hair liard with green leaves
to cover human odour. He sat in the water with his nose and
eyes clear. In the morning the hounds came back, disinterested,
and the men were too tired to beat the banks properly. When
thej' were gone, Adam dug a piece of water-logged fried saw-
belly out of his pocket and ate it.

He had schooled himself against hurry. Most men were caught
bolting. It took Adam five days to cross the short distance into
Georgia. He took no chances, held back his impatience with an


iron control. He was astonished at his abilit}^

On the edge of Valdosta, Georgia, he lay hidden until long
.after midnight, and he entered the town like a shadow, crept to
the rear of a cheap store, forced a window slovvdy so that the
screw's of the lock were pulled from the sun-rotted wood. Then
he replaced the lock but left the window open. He had to vv'ork
by moonlight drifting through dirty window's. He stole a pair of
cheap trousers, a white shirt, black shoes, black hat, and an oil-
skin raincoat, and he tried on each article for fit. He forced him-
self to rhake sure nothing looked disturbed before he climbed out
of the w'indow. He had taken nothing which was not heavily
stocked. He had not even looked for the cash drawer. Fle lowered
the window carefully and slipped frorh shadow to shadow m the
_ moonlight.


59




have a few hundred dollars to leave his- sons. That is what he
looked to be worth. When they inspected his bank-books they"
found that he had over ninety-three thousand dollars in the
bank and ten thousand dollars in good securities. They felt very
different about Mr Trask then. People with that much money
were rich. They would never have to worry. It was enough to
start a dynasty. The lawyers congratulated Charles and his
brother Adam. Under the will, they said, it was to be shared
equally. After the money they listed the personal effects left by
the deceased: five ceremonial swords presented to Cyrus at
various GAR conventions, an olivewood gavel with a gold plate
on it, a Aiasonic watch charm with a diamond set in the
dividers, the gold caps from the teeth he had out when he got
his plates, watch (silver), gold-headed stick, and so forth.

Charles read the letter twice more and cupped his forehead in
his hands. He wondered about Adam. He wanted Adam home.

Charles felt puzzled and dull. He built up the fire and put the
frying-pan to heat and sliced thick slices of salt pork into it.
Then he went back to stare at the letter. Suddenly he picked it
up and put it in tlie drawer of the kitchen table. He decided not
to think of tlie matter at all for a while.

Of course he thought of little else, but it was a dull circular
thinking that came back to the starting point again and again:
Where had he got it?

When two events have something in common, in their natures
or in time or place, we leap happily to the conclusion that they
are sirhilar, and from this tendency we create magics and store
them for re-teUing. Charles had never before had a letter de-
livered at the farm in his life. Some weeks later a boy ran out
to the farm with a telegram. Charles always connected the letter
and tlie telegram the way we group two deaths and anticipate a
third. He hurried to the village railroad station, carrying the
telegram in his hand.

‘Listen to this,’ he said to the operator,
already read it.’-

‘You did?’

‘It comes over the wire,’ said the operator. ‘I WTOte it down.

‘Oh ! Yes, sure. “Urgent need you telegraph me one hundred
dollars. Coming home. Adam.’’ ’ ^

‘Came collect,’ the operator said, ‘You owe me sixty cents.

‘Valdosta, Georgia - 1 never heard of it.’

‘Neither’d 1^ but it’s there.’

‘Say, Carlton, how do you go about telegraphing mone

61


Charles inspected him from head to foot. Ton don’t look’
prosperous.’

‘I’m not.’

‘Where’s your valise?’

‘I haven’t got one.’

‘Jesus Christ! Where’ve 3 '’Ou been?’

‘Mostly wandering about all over.’

‘Like a hobo?’

‘Like a hobo.’-

After all the years and the life that had made creased leather
out of Charles’s skin and redness in his dark eyeSj Adam knew
from remembering tliat Charles was thinking of two things -
the questions and something else.

‘Why didn’t you come home?’

‘I just got to wandering. Couldn’t stop. It gets into you.
That’s a real bad scar you’ve got there.’

‘That’s the one I wote you about. Gets worse all the time.
Why didn’t you write? Are j’ou hungry?’ Charles’s hands itched
into his pockets and out and touched his chin and scratched his
head.

‘It maj' go away. I saw a man once -bar-tender- he had one
that looked like a cat. It was a birthmark. His m'ckname was
Cat’ .

'Are you hungr 3 '?’

■ ‘Sure. I guess I am.'

‘Plan to stay home now?’

‘I - 1 guess so. Do you want to get to it now?’

‘I - 1 guess so,’ Charles echoed him. ‘Our father is dead.’

‘I know,’

‘How the hell do you know?’

‘Station agent told me. How long ago did he die?’

‘ ’Bout a month.’

‘What of?’

‘Pneumonia,’

‘Buried here?'

‘No. In Washington. I got a letter and nevyspapers. Carried
him on a caisson with a flag over it. The Vice-President was
there and the President sent a wreath. All in the papers. Pictures
too - I’ll show you. I’ve got it all.’

Adam studied his brother’s face until Charles looked away.
‘Are you mad at something?’ Adam asked.

‘What should I be mad at?’

‘It just sounded — ’


63




he said. ‘I just can’t get it through ray head. He loved you more,
than anything in the world.’

‘I don’t believe that.’

“You don’t have to. He liked everything }'ou brought him. He
didn’t like me. He didn’t like anything I gave him. Remember
the present I gave him, the pocket-knife? I cut and sold a load
of wood to get that knife. Well, he didn’t even take it to Wash-
ington with him. It’s right in his bureau right now. And you
gave him that pup. It didn’t cost you a thing. Well, I’ll show you
a pictine of that pup. It was at his funeral. A colonel was holding
it - it tTOS blind, couldn’t walk. They shot it after the funeral.’

Adam was puzzled by the fierceness of his brother’s tone. ‘I
don’t see,’ he said. ‘I don’t see what you’re getting at.’

‘I loved him,* said Charles. And, for the first time that Adam
could remember, Charles began to cry. He put his head down in
his arms and cried.

Adam was about to go to him when a h'ttle of the old fear
came back. No, he thought, if I touched him he would try to
kill me. He went to the open doonvay and stood looking out,
and he could hear his brother’s sniffling behind him.

It was not a prett}' farm near the house -never had been.
There was litter about it, an unkemptness, a run-downness, a
lack of plan; no flowers, and bits of paper and scraps of wood
scattered about on the ground. The house was not prettj’ either.
It was a well-built shant}' for shelter and cooking. It was a grim
farm and a grim house, unloved and tmloving. It was no home,
no place to long for or to come back to. Suddenly Adam thought
of his step-mother - as unloved as the farm, inadequate, clean in
her way, but no more wife than the farm was a home.

His brother’s sobbing had stopped. Adam turned. Charles was
looking blankly straight ahead. Adam said, ‘Tell me about
Mother.’

‘She died. I wrote you.’

‘Tell me about her.’

‘I told you. She died. It’s so long ago. She wasn’t your
Mother.’

The smile Adam had once caught on her face flashed up in
his mind. 'Her face was projected in front of him.

Charles’s voice came through the image and exploded it. ‘'VPill
you tell me one thing— not quick — think before you teU me, and
maybe don’t answer unless it’s true, your answer.’ Charles moved
his hps to form the question in advance. ‘Do you think it would
be possible for our father to be — dishonest?’

65




Charles said, ‘How did he get away with it? How in hell did
he get away with it? Nobody ever questioned it. Did you? Did
I? Did my mother? Nobody did. Not even in Washington.’ '

Adam stood up. ‘What’s in the house to eat? I’m going to
warm up something.’

‘I killed a chicken last night. I’ll fry it if you can wait.’

‘Anjthing quick?’

‘Some salt pork and plentj’ of eggs.’

‘I’ll have that,’ said Adam.

They left the question lying there, walked mentally around it,
stepped over it. Their words ignored it, but their minds never
left it. They wanted to talk about it and could not. Charles fried
salt pork, warmed up a skillet of beans, fried eggs.

‘I ploughed tlie pasture,’ he said. ‘Put in rj’e.’

‘How did it do?’

‘Just fine, once I got the rocks out.’ He touched his forehead.
‘I got this damn thing trying to pry out a stone.’

‘You wrote about tltat,’ Adam said. ‘Don’t know whether I
told you your letters meant a lot to me.’

'You never WTOte much wliat j'ou were doing,’ said Charles. .

‘I guess I didn’t want to think about it. -It was pretty bad,
most of it.’

‘I read about the campaigns in the papers. Did you go on
those?’

‘Yes. I didn’t want to think about them. Still don’t.’


‘Did you kill Injuns?’

‘Yes, we killed Injuns.’

‘I guess tlte/re real ornery.’

‘I guess so.’

‘You don’t have to talk about it if you don’t want to.’

, ‘I don’t want to.’

They are their dinner under the paraflin lamp. ‘We’d get more .
light if I would only get around to washing that lampshade.’

‘I’ll do it,’ said Adam. ‘It’s hard to think of everything.’

‘It’s going, to be fine having you back. How would you like to
go to the iim after supper?’

‘VX'^ell, we’ll see. Maybe I’d like just to sit awhile.’

•I didn’t write about it in a letter, but tliey’ve got girls at the
inn. I didn’t know but you’d like to go in with me. They change
e\'ery two weeks. I didn’t know but you’d like to look them over.


‘Girls?’

‘Yes, they’re upstairs. Makes it pretty handy. And I
you just coming home — ’


'’-'■'nght


67



first? I guess we' might as well get into it. We’re not thinking
about anything else.’

‘There’s the money,’ said Charles. ‘Over a hundred thousand
dollars - a fortune.’

‘What about the money?’

‘Well, where did it come from?’

‘How do I know? I told you he might have speculated. Some-
body might have put him on to a good thing there in Washing-
ton.’

‘Do you believe that?’

‘I don't believe anj^ing,’ Adam said. ‘I don’t Imow, so what
can I believe?’

‘It’s a lot of money,’ said Charles. ‘It’s a fortune left to us. We
^ can live the rest of our lives on it, or we can buy a hell of a lot
of land and make it paj'. Maybe you didn’t think about it, but
we’re rich. We’re richer than anybody hereabouts.’

Adam laughed. ‘You say it like it was" a jail sentence.’
